
Chapter
9
PHYSICAL OPTICS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to
:
Understand the concept of wavefront.
I
State Huygen's principle,
3
Use Huygen's principle to explain linear superposition of light
Understand interference of light.
Describe Young's double slit experiment and the evidence it provided to support
the wave theory of light,
Recognize and express colour patterns in thin films.
Describe the formation of Newton's rings,
Understand the working of Michelson's interferometer and its uses.
y
Explain the meaning of the term diffraction.
10
Describe diffraction at a single slit.
17
Derive the equation for angular position of first minimum.
12
Derive the equation d' sini) = mi.
13 Carry out calculations using the diffraction grating formula.
1⑇
Describe the phenomenon of diffraction of X-rays by crystals,
11
Appreciate the use of diffraction of X-rays by crystale.
to
Understand polarization as a phenomenon associated with transverse waves.
IT
Recognize and express that polarization is produced by a Polaroid
Understand the effect of rotation of Polaroid on polarization.
Understand how plane polarized light is produced and detected
L
ight is a type of energy which produces sensation of vision. But how does this energy
propagate? In 1678, Huygen's, an eminent Dutch scientist, proposed that
193
---

light energy from a luminous source travels in space as
waves. The experimental evidence in support of wave
theory in Huygen's time was not convincing However,
Young's interference experiment performed for the first time
in 1801 proved wave nature of light and thus established the
Huygen's wave theory. In this chapter you will study the
properties of light, associated with its wave nature.
9.1 WAVEFRONTS
DO
Light my
Consider a point source of light at S (Fig. 9.1 a). Waves
emitted from this source will propagate outwards in all
directions with speed c.After time 1, they will reach the
surface of an imaginary sphere with centre as S and radius
as of Every point on the surface of this sphere will be set
into vibration by the waves reaching there, As the distance
of all these points from the source is the same, their state
Rays
of vibration will be identical. In other words, all the points
on the surface of the sphere will have the same
phase
(a)
Such a surface on which all the points have the
Fly. 8.1
same phase of vibration is known as wavefront.
Spherical Wave fronts (a) and place
a wevelength
sport The arrows morecom nm
Thus in case of a point source, the wavefront is spherical
in shape. A line normal to the wavefront, showing the
direction of propagation of light is called a ray of light,
With time, the wave moves farther giving rise to new wave-
fronts. All these wavefronts will be concentric spheres of
increasing radii as shown in Fig. 9.1 (a). Thus the wave
propagates in space by the motion of the wavefronts The
distance between the consecutive wavefronts is one wave-
length. It can be seen that as we move away at greater
distance from the source, the wavefronts are parts of spheres
Do You Know?
of very large radii. A limited region taken on such a wavefront
Smit segments of large sphencen
can be regarded as a plane wavefront (Fig.9.1b): For example,
waverronta applicamente plane
light from the Sun reaches the Earth with plane wavefronts
in the study of interference and diffraction, plane waves and
plane wavefronts are considered. A usual way to obtain a
194
---

plane wave is to place a point source of light at the focus of
a convex lens. The rays coming out of the lens will constitute
plane waves
9.2 HUYGEN'S PRINCIPLE
A
Knowing the shape and location of a wavefront at any
instant I. Huygen's principle enables US to determine the
shape and location of the new wevefront at a later time
a
(+ AL Thisprinciple consists of two parts:
(I)
Every point of a wavefront may be considered as a
source of secondary wavelets which spread out in
B
forward direction with a speed equal to the speed of
propagation of the wave.
8
(II)
The new position of the wavefront after a certain
interval of time can be found by constructing a
(i) Spherical wavefront
surface that touches all the secondary wavelets.
C
The principle is illustrated in Fig. 9.2 (a): AB represents the
wavefront at any instant it. To determine the wavefront at
time 14 at draw secondary wavelets with centre at various
points on the wavefront AB and radius as cal where G is
speed of the propagation of the wave as shown in Fig.9.2 (a)
The new wavefront EM time I At is A'B' which is a
tangent envelope to all the secondary wavelets.
GM
Figure 92 (b) shows a similar construction for a plane wave-
front
9.3 INTERFERENCE OF LIGHT WAVES
An oil film floating on water surface exhibits beautiful
colour patterns. This happens due to Interference of light
D
D
waves. the phenomenon, which is being discussed in this
(b) Plane wavefront
section
His ⑆
Haygena' construction for
Conditions for Detectable Interference
determining the position of the
wavefronts AB and CDana a time
It was studied in Chapter 8 that when two waves travel in
acenvi At AB and CITY are the
the same medium, they would interfere constructively or
new positions of the
destructively. The amplitude of the resultant wave will be
greater then either of the individual waves, if they interferé
constructively, In the case of destructive interference, the
195
---

For Your Information
amplitude of the resultant wave will be less than either
of the individual waves
Interference of light waves is not easy to observe because
of the random emission of light from a source. The
following conditions must be met, in order to observe the
phenomenon,
1 The interfering beams must be monochromatic,
that is, of a single wavelength.
2.
The interfering beams of light must be coherent.
Consider two or more sources of light waves of the same
wavelength. If the sources send out crests or troughs at
the same instant, the Individual waves maintain a constant
phase difference with one another. The monochromatic
sources of light which emit waves, having a constant
Nonochiumatic Light
phase difference, are called coherent sources
Sodum chicaide in a families gives
out pure yellow light This light is not
a Pisture of IDO and green
A common method of producing two coherent light beams
is to use a monochromatic source to Illuminate a screen
containing two small holes, usually in the shape of slits.
The light emerging from the two slits is coherent because a
single source produces the original beam and two slits
serve only to split it into two parts. The points on
8
Huygen's wavefront which send out secondary wavelets
are also coherent sources of light.
9.4 YOUNG'S DOUBLE SLIT EXPERIMENT
Fig. 9.3 (a) shows the experimental arrangement, similar to
a
that devised by Young in 1801, for studying interference
S
effects of light. A screen having two narrow slits is
5,
illuminated by a beam of monochromatic light The portion
of the wavefront incident on the slits behaves as a source
of secondary wavelets (Huygen's principle). The secondary
wavelets leaving the slits are coherent. Superposition of
these wavelets result in a series of bright and dark bands
Fig 9.3 tal
(fringes) which are observed on a second screen placed at
Ray goornity of Young's double
some distance parallel to the first screen.
act expense
Let us now consider the formation of bright and dark
bands. As pointed out earlier the two slits behave as
196
---

coherent sources of secondary wavelets The wavelets
arrive at the screen in such a way that at some points
crests fall on crests and troughs on troughs resulting in
constructive interference and bright fringes are formed.
There are some points on the screen where crests meet
troughs giving rise to destructive interference and dark
fringes are thus formed.
this
Max
Main
incident
Mes
movil
Max
Max
Mas
Mps
Mas
5.
Max
Mai
Max
Max
A
C
Fig. 9.3 (I))
Young's double all experiment fur interference of Net
The bright fringes are termed as maxima and dark fringes
as minima.
In order to derive equations for maxima and minima, an
F
arbitrary point P is taken on the screen on one side of
the central point o as shown in Fig. 9.3 (c). AP and BP
are the paths of the rays reaching P. The line AD is
drawn such that AP = DP The separation between the
centres of the two slits is AB # d. The distance of the
E
.
screen from the slits is CO = L. The angle between
*
CP and CO is 0. It can be proved that the angle
BAD = 0 by assuming that AD is nearly normal to BP.
fig 13 IDI
The path difference between the wavelets, leaving the
Geometrical construction of
slits and arriving at P. is BD. If is the number of
Stungs double dit experiment
wavelengths, contained within BD, that determines
whether bright or dark fringe will appear at P If the point
P is to have bright fringe, the path difference BD must be
an integral multiple of wavelength.
197
---

Thus,
BD=m,
where
m=0, 1. 2.
Since
BD = di sino
therefore
d sin B =mi
(9.1)
it is observed that each bright fringe on one side of o has
symmetricallylocated bright fringe on the other side of O. The
central bright fringe is obtained when m a D. If a dark fringe
appears at point P. the path difference BD must contain
half-integral number of wavelengths.
Thus
1
therefore,
d
.
A
(9.2)
2
The first dark fringe, in this case, will obviously appear for
m = 0 and second dark for m=1 The interference pattern
formed in the Young's experiment is shown in Fig. 9,3 (d).
For Your Information
Fits 9.310
d
sing
tanit
An interference patient by monochromunic lips in Young's itocia side experiment
2
0.035
0.005
4
0,070
0.000
G
0.104
0.105
Equations 9.1 and 9,2 can be applied for determining the
B
0.139
0.140
linear distance on the screen between adjacent bright or
10
0.174
0.176
dark fringes. If the angle 0 is small, then
sin e a tane
198
---

Now from Fig. 9,3 (c). tane = yot where y is the distance
of the point P from o If 1a bright fringe is observed at P.
then from Eq 9.1, we get,
y=m
(9,3)
If P is to have dark fringe it can be proved that
(9,4)
In order to determine the distance between two adjacent
bright fringes on the screen, mth and (m + 1) th fringes are
considered.
For the mth bright fringe,
Tights
and for the (m + 1)th bright fringe
y====(m+1) AL
If the distance between the adjacent bright fringes is y,
then
Aya Ymel AL
An Interference potent firmed
with white light.
Therefore,
(9.5)
Similarly, the distance between two adjacent dark fringes
can be proved to be II is, therefore, found that the
bright and dark fringes are of equal width and are equally
spaced
Eq. 9.5 reveals that fringe spacing increases if red
light (long wavelength) is used as compared to blue light
(short wavelength). The fringe spacing varies directly with
distance L between the slits and screen and inversely with
the separation di of the slits.
if the separation d' between the two slits, the order m of a
bright or dark fringe and fringe spacing Ay are known. the
wavelength X of the light used for interference effect can be
determined by applying Eq. 9.5.
199
---

Example 9.1: The distance between the sits in Young's
double silt experiment is 0,25 cm. Interference fringes are
formed on à screen placed at a distance of 100 cm from the
slits. The distance of the third dark fringe from the centralbright
fringe is 0.059 cm. Find the wavelength of the incident light.
Solution: Given that
d=0.25cm=2.5x10'm
y=0.059 cm =59x10°m
For the 3rd dark fringe m=2
Using
westing Information
x-59x109mx25x1 r25x10° m
Therefore,
1=5.90x107m-590.nm
Example 9.2: Yellow sodium light of wavelength 589 nm,
emitted by B single source passes through two narrow
nurs seen on oily water surface
slits 1.00 mm apart. The interference pattern is observed
due in interference of incident
on a screen 225 cm away. How far apart are two adjacent
e light.
bright fringes?
Solution: Given that
E
d = 1,00 mm = 1.00 x 10 m
225 cm = 2.25 m
Ay=7
Using ***
2.25
E
E
or
1.33 mm.
Thus, the adjacent frings will be 1,33 mm apart.
200
---

9.5 INTERFERENCE IN THIN FILMS
A thin film in a transparent medium whose chickness is
no
comparable with the wavelength of light Brilliant and
A
AF
beautiful colours in soap bubbles and oil film on the
5
surface of water are due to interference of light reflected
from the two surfaces of the film as explained below:
U
Air
Consider a thin film of a refracting medium, A beam AB of
Di
monachromatic light of wavelength 1 is incident on its upper
Vintier
surface It is partly reflected along BC and partly refracted
THE
into the medium along BD At D it is again partly reflected
construction of
Inside the medium along DE and then at E retracted along EF as
mederence of light due to a thin oil
shown in Fig 9.4. The beams BE and EF being the parts of the same
im
primary beam have a phase conerence. As the film is thin, so the
separation between the beams BC and EF will be very small.
Do You KHOWT
and they will superpose and the result of their interference
will be detected by the eye it can be seen in Fig. 9.4. that
the original beam spiris into two parts BC and EF due to the
thin film enter the eye after covering different lengths
of paths. Their path adference depends upon (1) thickness
and nature of the film and (II) angle of incidence. If the two
reflected waves reinforce each other then the film as seen
with the help of a parallel beam of monochromatic light
will lock bright. However, if the thickness of the film and
angle of incidence are such that the two reflected waves
cancel each other the film will look dark:
The which aldescarce of Description
If white light is incident on a film of irregular thickness at all
furthers me to moderance II the
Egre reflected for FIN curplane
possible angles, WE should consider the interference
layered sortace
pattern due to each spectral colour separately. It is quite
possible that at a certain place on the film, its thickness
and the angle of incidence of light are such that the
condition of destructive interference of one colour is being
satisfied. Hence, that portion of the firm will exhibit the
remaining constituent colours of the white light as shown in
Fig. 9.5.
9.6 NEWTON'S RINGS
When B plano-convex lens of long local length is placed in
contact with a plane glass plate (Fig. 9.6 a). a thin air film is
FREE
enclosed between the upper surface of the glass plate and
interference pattern produced by .
thin soap film luminated by white
the lower surface of the lens The thickness of the air film is
light
201
---

almost zero at the point of contact o and it gradually increases
as one proceeds towards the periphery of the lens. Thus, the
points where the thickness of air film is constant, will lie on a
circle with o as centre.
By means of a sheet of glass G, a parallel beam of
monochromatic light is reflected towards the plano-convex
lens L. Any ray of monochromatic light that strikes the
(a)
upper surface of the air film nearly along normal is partly
reflected and partly refracted The ray refracted in the
air film is also reflected partly at the lower surface of the
(in
film. The two reflected rays, i.e. produced at the upper
Experimental arrangament for
and lower surfaces of the film, are coherent and interfere
observingNewtorist
constructively or destructively. When the light reflected
upwards is observed through a microscope M which is
focussed on the glass plate, series of dark and bright rings
are seen with centre at o (Fig. 9,6 b). These concentric
rings are known as Newton's rings.
At the point of contact of the lens and the glass plate, the
thickness of the film is effectively zero but due to reflection
at the lower surface of air film from denser medium, an
additional path difference of N2 is introduced Consequently,
the centre of Newton rings is dark due to destructive
interference.
Fig. 9.8 (b)
A getter if mg due M
9.7 MICHELSON'S INTERFEROMETER
of light
Michelson's interferometer is an instrument that can be used
to measure distance. with extremely high precision. Albert
M
A Michelson devised this instrument in 1881 using the
idea of interference of light rays. The essential features of a
Michelson's interferometer are shown schematically in Fig.9.
M.
e
L.
Monochromatic light from an extended source falls on a
half silvered glass plate G, that partially reflects it and
Source
3
partially transmits it. The reflected portion labelled as I in
the figure travels a distance L1 to mirror M which reflects
the beam back towards G+ The half silvered plate G,
partially transmits this portion that finally arrives at the
Flg 0.7
observer's eye. The transmitted portion of the original
Schematic diagram of di Mitheler in's
beam labelledas II. travels a distance L to mirror M3 which
interferomator.
reflects the beam back toward G. The beam Il partially
reflected by G1 also arrives the observer's eye finally. The
202
---

plate G2 out from the same piece of glass as Qu. is
introduced in the path of beam II as a compensator plato,
Gj, therefore, equalizes the path length of the bearris E and
E in glass. The two beams having their different paths are
coherent. They produce interference effects when they
For Your Information
arrive at observer's eyes. The observer then sees a series
of parallel interference fringes.
In a practical interferometer, the mirror M can be moved
along the direction perpendicular to its surface by means of
a precision screw. As the length L. is changed, the pattern
of interference - fringes is observed to shift. If M is
displaced through a distance equal to 1/2, a path difference
of double of this displacement is produced, Le., equal to 1
A photograph el Michelson
Thus a fringe is seen shifted forward across the line of
reference of cross wire in the eye piece of the telescope used
to view the tringes.
A fringe is shilted, each time the mirror is displaced
through 3/2. Hence, by counting the number E of the fringes
which are shifted by the displacement L of the mirror, we can
write the equation,
For Toar Information
Lum
(9.6)
Very precise length measuremente can be made with an
interferometer. The motion of mirror M. by only 7/4 produces
a clear difference between brightness and darkness. For
1. = 400 nm, this means B high precision of 100 em or 10 mm.
Michelson measured the length of standard metre in terms
of the wavelength of red cadmium light and showed that
the standard metre was equivalent to 1,553, 163.5
wavelengths of this light.
Interference Dieges in the Michaison
9.8 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT
In the interference pattern obtained with Young's double slit
experiment (Fig. 9.3b). the central region of the fringe system
is bright If light travels in a straight line. the central region
should appear dark Le., the shadow of the screen between
the two slits. Another simple experiment can be performed
for exhibiting the same effect
203
---

Consider that a small and smooth steel ball of about 3 mm
in diameter is illuminated by a point source of light. The
Goreen
Shadow
shadow of the object is received on a screen as shown in
Object
Fig. 9,8 The shadow of the spherical object is not
completely dark but has a bright spot at its centre.
Shadow
According to Huygen's principle. each point on the rim
of the sphere behaves as a source of secondary
wavelets which illuminate the central region of the
Bright spot
shadow
These two experiments clearly show that when light travels
Bending of light caused by its
past an obstacie, it does not proceed exactly along a
u spherical object,
straight path, but bends around the obstacle.
The property of bending of light around obstacles
and spreading of light waves into the geometrical
shadow of an obstacle is called diffraction.
Point to ponder
The phenomenon is found to be prominent when the
Hold two fingers close together to
wavelength of light is large as compared with the size of
form is all. Lock of is light but
the obstacle or aperture of the slit. The diffraction of light
through the all. Quisurve the
pottern of light being seem and
occurs, in effect, due to the interference between rays
think why a is so
coming from different parts of the same wavefront
9.9 DIFFRACTION DUE TO A NARROW SLIT
Fig. 9.9 shows the experimental arrangement for studying
diffraction of light due to a narrow slit. The sit AB of width d is
illuminated by a parallel beam of monochromatic light of
wavelength 3. The screen S is placed parallel to the slit for
observing the effects of the diffraction of light. A small portion
of the incident wavefront passes through the narrow slit,
Each point of this section of the wavefront sends out
secondary wavelets to the screen. These wavelets then
interfere to produce the diffraction pattern. It becomes
simple to deal with rays instead of wavefronts as shown in
the figure. In this figure, only nine rays have been drawn
whereas actually there are a large number of them. Let us
Fill 9.3
consider rays 1 and 5 which are in phase on the
Difficultion of light due to il names
wavefront ABWhen these reach the wavefront AC. ray
sil AB, The dats represser the
sources of secondary wovelets
5 would have a path difference ab say equal to 1/2. Thus,
when these two rays reach point P on the screen, they will
interfere destructively, Similarly, all other pairs 2 and 6, 3
204
---

and 7, 4 and a differ in path by .2 and will do the same,
For the pairs of rays, the path difference ab= d(2 sin 0.
5g min
1stmin
2nd THE
2nd mex
The equation for the first minimum is, then
2nd and
2nd miss
3rd mail
Urd mm
d
2
2
or
d' sinth 2.
(9,7)
in general, the conditions for different orders of minima on
Flg $ 15 tax
either side of centre are given by
Diffraction pattern of mono
light producted due lu H
o serma where (1,2,3
)
(9.8)
single sit graphical representation
and photograph of the pattern
The region between any two consecutive minima both
above and below o wis be bright. A narrow slit, therefore,
produces a series of bright and dark regions with the first
bright region at the centre of the pattern. Such a diffraction
pattern is shown in Fig. 9.10(a) and (b).
9.10 DIFFRACTION GRATING
A diffraction grating is a glass plate having a large number
of close parallel equidistant slits mechanically ruled on it.
Fini 9.10.00
The transparent spacing between the scratches on the
Diffection calture produced by units
glass plate act as slits. A typical diffraction grating has
a single it
about 400 to 5000 lines per centimetre.
In order to understand how a grating diffracts light, consider
a parallel beam of monochromatic light illuminating the
grating at normal incidence (Fig. 9.11). A few of the equally
spaced narrow slits are shown in the figure. The distance
o
between two adjacent sits is d. called grating element Its
value is obtained by dividing the length L of the grating by the
total number N of the lines ruled on it The sections of wave-
front that pass through the slits behave as sources of
secondary wavelets according to Huygen's principle.
In Fig. 9.11, consider the parallel rays which after
diffraction through the grating make an angle 9 with AB,
U
the normal to grating. They are then brought to focus on
if
Y
the screen as P by a convex lens. If the path difference
between rays 1 and 2 is one wavelength 2. they will
Fl# 0.11
reinforce each other at P. As the incident beam consists of
Diffraction of light due to grating
parallel rays, the rays from any two consecutive slits will differ
in path byk when they arrive at They will, therefore interfere
205
---

constructively. Hence, the condition for constructive
Interesting Information
interference is that ab, the path difference between two
consecutive rays, should be equal to A i.e.,
ab = A
(9.9)
From Fig. 9,11
eb ==d'sing
(9,10)
d' being the grating element. Substituting the value of ab in
The fine rulinga, each 0.5 m wide
Eq. 9.9
on il complact duc function as II
diffaction going When e shall
dsin8=1
(9.11)
source of white light Dummates If
dec. the difracted light
culored "lanes" that are composter
According to Eq. 9.10, when 0 = 0 i.e., along the direction
of the satierra from the
of normal to the grating, the path difference between the
ruängs:
rays coming out from the slits of the grating will be zero. So
we will get a bright image in this direction. This is known as
zero order image formed by the grating. If we increase 0
on either side of this direction, a value of 0 will be arrived
Gan You Tell?
at which dsine will be equal to X and according to Eq. 9.11,
we will again get a bright image. This is known as first
order image of the grating, In this way if we continue
increasing 0, we will get the second, third, etc. images on
either side of the zero order image with dark regions in between
The second, third order bright images would occur according
as d sin 0 becoming equal to 27. 3.2. etc. Thus Eq. 9.11
can be written in more general form as
=ni
(9.12)
Light same projected through Hus
difraction grating produce an
wheren=0:11213e0
interference pattern What coloursi
are between the bands of
However, if the Incident light contains different
wavelengths, the image of each wavelength for a certain
value of n is diffracted in a different direction. Thus,
separate images are obtained corresponding to each
wavelength or colour. Eq. 9.12 shows that the value of e
depends upon n, so the images of different colours are
For your Information
much separated in higher orders.
9.11 DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY
CRYSTALS
Diffiction of white light by
X-rays is a type of electromagnetic radiation of much shorter
trie difficultion grating
wavelength, typically of the order of 10 m.
206
---

In order to observe the effects of diffraction, the grating
spacing must be of the order of the wavelength of the
I
radiation used. The regular array of atoms in a crystal
forms a natural diffraction grating with spacing that is
typically = 1019 m. The scattering of X-rays from the atoms
in a crystalline lattice gives rise to diffraction effects very
F
e'
similar to those observed with visible light incident on
ordinary grating.
d
B
P
e
The study of atomic structure of crystals by X-rays was
d une
ds
initiated in 1914 by W.H. Bragg and W.I. Bragg with
P.
P.
remarkable achievements. They found that a
monochromatic beam of X-rays was reflected from a
Fig 8.12
crystal plano as if il acted like mirror. To understand this
effect, a series of atomic planes of constant interplanar
Diffaction of X-rays from the
influe planos of orystati
spacing d parallel to B crystal face are shown by lines PP
PP.P A and so on, in Fig. 9.12.
Suppose an X-rays beam is incident at an angle B on one of
Interesting Application
the planes, The beam can be reflected from both the upper
and the lower planes of atoms. The beam reflected from
lower plane travels some extra distance as compared to the
beam reflected from the upper plane. The effective path
difference between the two reflected beams is 2d sina.
Therefore, for reinforcement, the path difference should be an
Difficition of radio Warni
integral multiple of the wavelength Thus
2d sint==2
(9.13)
Interesting Information
The value of n is referred to as the order of reflection The
equation 9.13 is known BS the Bragg equation, It can be
used to determine interplanar spacing between similar
parallel planes of a crystal if X-rays of known wavelength
are allowed to diffract from the crystal.
The spectrum of white light due to
X-ray diffraction has been very useful in determining the
ifficition grimp of 100 still
structure of biologically important molecules such as
haemoglobin; which is on important constituent of blood
and double helix structure of DNA
Example 9.3: Light of wavelength 450 nm is incident
on a diffraction grating on which 5000 lines/cm have been
ruled.
The spectrum of white Fight due ID
difficion grading of
(1)
How many orders of spectra can be observed on
either side of the direct beam?
207
---

(ii)
Determine the angle corresponding to each order
Interesting illustration
Solution: (I) Given that
AT
A
=
m
For maximum number of order of spectra sin 0=1
Since
d
therefore subsituting the values. in the above equation,
we get
500000 mixi=n x 450 x 10 n or n°500000
1
1
A multi-spirture diffication pattern
x 450 DC 10
This is a picture of a where-light
point source shot through a pera
of rightly woven cloth
or
n=4,4
Tidbin
Hence, the maximum order of spectrum is 4.
(i)
For the first order of spectrum, n=1
d'sinu=nk,
gives
Diffication petern of . single
1
human hair under lager beam
sinß =1 x 450 x 10 th
illumination
500000
sin#= (500000)(450 x10")
For Your Information
sing 0.225
or
0=13"
For second order spectrum.r = 2, using Eq. dsine =ni
500000
sin i)=0.45
or
0=26.7°
The third order spectrum (n=3) will be observed at 4) = 42.5°
inf=3 x 500000m"x 450 x10'm
=0.675 i.e. at 8=42.5"
Looking through two prientrars, When
and the fourthorder spectrum (n=4) will occur at (8=64.2
they are very His light
passition through
sin 0=4 X 500000.r 450 x 102 m
sin 0 = 0.9 gives 0=64,2°
208
---

9.12 POLARIZATION
(s)
in transverse mechanical waves, such as produced in a
stretched string, the vibrations of the particles of the medium
are perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the
waves: The vibration can be oriented along vertical,
(h)
horizontal or any other direction (Fig. 9.13). In each of these
cases, the transverse mechanical wave is said to be
polarized The plane of potarization is the plane containing
the direction of vibration of the particles of the medium and
the direction of propagation of the wave.
A light wave produced by oscillating charge consists of a
periodic variation of electric field vector accompanied by
themagnetic field vector at right angle to each other. Ordinary
light has components of vibration in al possible planes, Such a
light is unpolarized On the other hand, if the vibrations are
confined only in one plane, the light is said to be polarized
Fig 2.13
Transverse MOUNS on a strip polarized
Production and Detection of Plane Polarized Light
(a) in a verical place int
m plane
The light emitted by an ordinary incandescent puib (and also
by the Sun) is unpolarized because is (electrical) vibrations
are randomly oriented in space (Fig. 9.14). It is possible to
obtain plano polarized beam of light from un-polarized light
by removing all waves from the beam except those having
vibrations along one particular direction. This can be
achieved by various processos such as selective
absorption, reflection from different surfaces, refraction
through crystals and scattering by small particles.
The selective absorption method is the most common
Fig 1 T4
An unpolume light
the
in
method to obtain plane polarized light by using certain types
incardesente India Tim in al
of materials called dichraic substances. These materials
directions
transmit only those waves, whose vibrations are parallel to a
Pourisez
particular direction and will absort: those waves whose
vibrations are in other directions One such commercial
Plana Polarized
polarizing material is a potaroid
light
If un-polarized light is made incident on a sheet of polaroid,
(a)
No light
the transmitted light will be plane polarized. If a second
light bearn
sheet of palaroid placed in such a way that the axes of
the polaroids, shown by straight lines drawn on them, are
parallel (Fig. 9.15a). the light is transmitted through the
second polaroid also If the second polaroid is slowly rotated
(D)
about the beam of light, 35 exis of rotation. the light
Fig 815
emerging out of the second polaroid gets dimmer and
Experimenta arangerienti to show
that light MUSE - The
dimmer and disappears when the axes become mutually
terms with BUTTOWN indicted
of HgM Wame
209
---

Do you known
perpendicular (Fig. 9,15 b). The light reappears on further
rotation and becomes brightest when the axes are again
parallel to each other.
This experiment proves that light waves are transverse
waves. If the light waves were longitudinal, they would
never disappear even if the two polaroids were mutually
perpendicular,
Light reflected lipen smooth surface
Reflection of light from water, glass, snow and rough road
of water is partially potartzed
surfaces, for larger angles of incidences, produces glare.
parallel to the surface
Since the reflected light is partially polarized, glare can
considerably be reduced by using polaroid sunglasses.
Sunlight also becomes partially polorized because of
scattering by air molecules of the Earth's atmosphere. This
effect can be observed by looking directly up through a pair of
sunglasses made of polarizing glass. At certain orientations
of the lenses, less light passes through than at others.
Interesting Information
Optical Rotation
Unpolarized
When a plane polarized light is passed through certain
light
crystals, they rotate the plane of polarization. Quartz
and sodium chlorate crystals are typical examples, which
are termed as optically active crystals.
Sugar solution
potérizer
Analyzer
A few millimeter thickness of such crystals will rotate the
Sugar solution rotates the plane of
plane of polarization by many degrees. Certain organic
polarization of incident light ab that
I is no longer horizonta but at an
substances, such as sugar and tartaric acid, show optical
angle The mayae thus stops the
rotation when they are in solution. This property of optically
light when rolated from the versical
active substances can be used to determine their
Icrossed postiona
concentration in the solutions.
SUMMARY
A surface passing through all the points undergoing a similar disturbance (i.e.,
having the same phase) at a given instant is called a wavefront.
When the disturbance is propagated out in all directions from a point source, the
wavefronts in this case are spherical.
Radial lines leaving the point source in all directions represent rays
The distance between two consecutive wavefronts is called wavelength.
Huygen's principle states that all points on a primary wavefront can be considered
as the source of secondary wavelets.
210
---

When two or more waves overlap each other, there IN a resultant wave This
phenomenon is called interference.
Constructivo interference occurs when two waves, travelling in the same medium
overlap and the amplitude of the resultant wave is greater than either of
the individual waves.
In case of destructive interference, the amplitude of the resulting wave is less than
either of the individual waves.
in Young's double slit experiment,
(i)
for bright fringe, d sine a mi,
in
for dark fringe,
00
the distance between two adjacent bright or dark fringes is
Newton's rings are circular fringes formed due to interference in a thin air film
enclosed between a convex lens and e fiat glass plate.
Michelson's interferometer is used for very precise length measurements
The distance L of the moving mirror when m fringes move in view is mX/2.
Bending of light around obstacies is due to diffraction of light
For a diffraction grating:
d sine = ni where n stands for nth order of maxima
For diffraction of X-rays by crystals
2d
sina
-
nl.
where n is the order of reflection.
Polarization of light proves that light consists of transverse electromagnetic waves.
QUESTIONS
9.1 Under what conditions two or more sources of light behave as coherent sources?
9.2 How is the distance between interference fringes affected by the separation between
the slits of Young's experiment? Can fringes disappear?
98 Can visible light produce interference fringes? Explain.
9,4 In the Young's experiment, one of the slits is covered with blue filter and other with
red filter. What would be the pattern of light intensity on the screen?
211
---

9.5
Explain whether the Young's experiment is an experiment for studying interference
or diffraction effects of light.
9.6 An oil film spreading over a wet footpath shows colours. Explain how does it
happen?
9,7 Could you obtain Newton's rings with transmitted light? If yes, would the pattern be
different from that obtained with reflected light?
9.6
In the white light spectrum obtained with a diffraction grating, the third order image
of a wavelength coincides with the fourth order image of il second wavelength
Calculate the ratio of the two wavelengths,
0.0
How would you manage to get more orders of spectra using a diffraction grating?
9:10 Why the polaroid sunglasses are better than ordinary sunglasses?
9.11 How would you distinguish between un-polarized and plane-polarized lights?
9.12 Fill in the blanks.
(1) According to
principle, each point on a wavefront acts as a source
of secondary
-
(II)
in Young's experiment, the distance between two adjacent bright fringes for
violet light is
than that for green light
(iii) The distance between bright fringes in the interference pattern
as
the wavelength of light used increases.
(iv) A diffraction grating is used to make B diffraction pattern for yellow light and
then for red light. The distances between the red spots will be
than
that for yellow light
(w) The phenomenon of polarization of light reveals that light waves are
waves.
(V) A polaroid is a commercial
(VR) A polaroid glass
glare of light produced at a road surface.
NUMERICAL PROBLEMS
8,1 Light of wavelength 546 nm is allowed to illuminate the slits of Young's experiment. The
separation between the slits is 0.10 mm and the distance of the screen from the slits
where interference effects are observed is 20 cm. Al what angle the first minimum will
fall? What will be the linear distance on the screen between adjacent maxima?
(Ans: 0,16°, 1.1 mm)
212
---

9.2 Calculate the wavelength of light, which illuminates two slits 0,5 mm apert and
produces an interference pattern on a screen placed 200 cm away from the slils. The
first bright fringe is observed at a distance of 2.40 mm from the central bright image.
(Ans: 600 nm)
9.3 In a double slit experiment the second order maximum occurs at 0 = 0,25°. The
wavelength is 650 nm. Determine the slit separation.
(Ans. 0.30 mm)
9,4 A monochromatic light of A = 588 nm is allowed to fall on the half silvered glass
plate G1. in the Michelson Interferometer, If mirror M1 is moved through 0.233 mm,
how many tringes will be observed to shift2
(Ans: 792)
9,5 A second order spectrum is formed at an angle of 38.0" when light falls normally on
a diffraction grating having 5400 lines per centimetre. Determine wavelength of the
light used.
(Ans. 570 nm)
9,6 A light is incident normally on a grating which has 2500 lines per centimetre. Compute
the wavelength of a spectral line for which the deviation in second order is 15.0°.
(Ans: 518 nm)
9.7 Sodium light (2 - 589 nm) is incident normally on a grating having 3000 lines per
centimetre. What is the highest order of the spectrum obtained with this grating?
(Ans; 5th)
9.8 Blue light of wavelength 480 nm illuminates a diffraction grating, The second order
image is formed at an angle of 30° from the central image, How many lines in a
centimetre of the grating have been ruled?
(Ans: 5.2 x lines per cm)
9,9 X-rays of wavelength 0.150 nm are observed to undergo a first order reflection at
a
Bragg angle of 13,3° from a quartz (SiO2) crystal. What is the interplanar spacing of
the reflecting planes in the crystal?
(Ans: 0.326 nm)
9,10An X-ray beam of wavelength 2 undergoes a first order reflection from a crystal
when its angle of incidence to a crystal face is 26.5°, and an X-ray beam of
wavelength 0.097 nm undergoes a third order reflection when its angle of incidence
to that face is 60,0°, Assuming that the two beams reflect from the same family of
planes, calculate (a) the interplanar spacing of the planes and (b) the wavelength 1.
[Ans: (a) 0.168.nm(b) 0.150 nm)
213
---