
Chapter 10
OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1 Recognize the term of least distance of distinct vision.
2 Understand the terms magnifying power and resolving power.
3 Derive expressions for magnifying power of simple microscope, compound
microscope and astronomical telescope.
4 Understand the working of spectrometer,
B Describe Michelson rolating mirror method to find the speed of light.
5 Understand the principles of optical fibre.
7 Identify the types of optical fibres.
a Appreciate the applications of optical fibres.
n
this chapter, some optical instruments that are based on the principles of reflection
and retraction, will be discussed The most common of these instruments are the
magnifying glass, compound microscope and telescopes, We shall also study
magnification and resolving powers of these optical instruments, The spectrometer and
an arrangement for measurement of speed of light are also described. An introduction to
optical fibres, which has developed a great importance in medical diagnostics,
telecommunication and computer networking, is also included.
10.1 LEAST DISTANCE OF DISTINCT VISION
The normal human eye can focus a sharp image of an object on the eye if the object is
located any where from infinity to a certain point called the near point.
The minimum distance from the eye at which an object appears to be
distinct is called the least distance of distinct vision or near point.
214
---

This distance represented by d is about 25 cm from the eye
If the object is held closer to the eye than this distance the
image formed will be blurred and fuzzy The location of
the near point, however, changes with age,
10.2 MAGNIFYING
POWER
AND
RESOLVING POWER OF OPTICAL
INSTRUMENTS
When an object is placed in front of a convex lens at a point
beyond its focus, a real and inverted image of the object is
formed as shown in the Fig. 10.1.
F
2F
2F
F
o
P
q
Eg 12.1
el
The ratio of the size of the Image to the size
of the object is called magnification.
(a)
As the object is brought from a far off point to the focus, the
magnification goes on increasing, The apparent size of on
object depends on the angle subtended by it at the eye.Thus,
(b)
the closer the object is to the eye. the greater is the angle
Fly 102
subtended and larger appears the size of the object
When the same object la virwed at
(Fig.10.2). The maximum size of an object as seen by
shoder distance. the imagi on the
naked eye is obtained when the object is placed at the
retina of the eye la greater to the
least distance of distinct vision. For lesser distance, the
object appears larger and more
details can be seen. The angle B
image formed looks blurred and the details of the object
the object subtends in (a) is greater
are not visible.
than a in(b)
The
magnifying power or angular
magnification is defined as the ratio of the
angles subtended by the image as seen
through the optical device to that subtended
by the object at the unaided eye.
215
---

The optical resolution of a microscope or B telescope tells
us how close together the two point sources of light can be
so that they are still seen as two separate sources. if two
point sources are too close, they will appear as one becau-
se the optical instrument makes a point source look like a
small disc or spot of light with circular diffraction fringes
Although the magnification can be made as large as one
desires by choosing appropriate focal lengths, but the
magnification alone is of no use unless we can see the
details of the object distinctly.
The resolving power of an instrument is its ability to reveal
the minor details of the object under examination.
Resolving power is expressed as the reciprocal of minimum angle
Tid-bits
which two point sources subtends at the instrument so that
their images are seen as two distinct spots of light rather
If you find # difficill to read amail
than one. Raleigh showed that for light of wavelength 2
print make 3 pinticle in a piece of
paper and hold I' in som of your
through a lens of diameter D, the resolving power is
eye close to the page You will @@@
given by R = 1
the print clearly.
1,22A
Where
22
a
(19,1)
The smaller the value of a greater is the resolving power
because two distant objects which are close together can
then be seeh separated through the instrument.
In the case of 8 grating spectrometer, the resolving power
R of the grating is defined as
R
(10.2)
where x 44 if is and - Thus, we SBG that a
grating with high resolving power can distinguish small
difference in wavelength, If N is the number of rulings on
the grating, is can be shown that the resolving power in the
mth-order diffraction equals the product N x mile
R=Nxm
(10.3)
216
---

10.3 SIMPLE MICROSCOPE
As discussed above a convinger or conver lans can bu
used to help the eye to the small objects distinctly A
watch maker uses convex tens to repair the watches The
object is placed inside the focal point of the lens The
magnified and virtual image is formed at least distance of
distinct vision di or much farther from the lens:
Let us, now. calculate the magnification of a simple
microscope in Fig 10,3 (a) the image formed by the
object, when placed at a distance of, on the eye is shown
In Fig. 10.3 (b), B lens is placed just in front of the eye and
the object is placed in from of the tens in such a way that a
virtual image of the object is formed at a distance d from
the eye, The size of the Image is new much larger than
without the lens
o
al
If II and n are the respectivo angles subtended by the
object when seen through the lens (simple microscope)
(6)
and when viewed directly, than angular magnification M is
defined as
=="
(10,4)
Eyli
not
90D
When anglee are small, then they are nearly equal to their
tangents From Fig. 10,3 (a) and (b), Will find
(b)
Flu. 10.3
Sun of the object
o
=lana
Simple Microscope
Distance of the object
of
Size of the image
and
B=tanji=
Distance of the image
a
Since the image is at the least distance of distinct vision.
hence,
qad
Therefore
p=== if
C
the angular magnification
M =
217
---

As we already know that
/
Size of the image
Distance of the image = =
III
o
Size of the object
Distance of the object P
Therefore,
M= P p
(10.5)
For virtuni Image, the lens formula is written as
111
But
q =d
f p o
Hence
or
due
P
Hence the magnification of a convex lens (simple
microscope) can be expressed as
(10.6)
It is, thus, dovious that for a lens of high angular
magnification the focal length should be small If, for
example, / IS 5 cm and d = 25 cm, then M = 6, the object
would look six times larger when viewed through such a lens.
10.4 COMPOUND MICROSCOPE
Whenever high magnification is desired, a compound
microscope is used. H consists of two convex lenses, an
object lens of very short focal length and an eye-piece of
Fly 10.4 (b)
comparatively longer focal length, The ray diagram of a
Compound Microscope
compound microscope is given in Fig. 10,4 (a).
A
B
04
4
S
e,
1
B
6
b.
01
o,
Objective
eye-place
A
Fig.19.4(s)
Ray diagram of a Compound Microscope
218
---

The object of height h is placed just beyond the principal
focus of the objective. This produces a real, magnified
image of height by of the object at a place situated within
the local point of the eye-piece. It is then further magnified
by the eye-piece, In normal adjustment, the eye-piece is
positioned so that the final image is formed at the near
point of the eye at a distance d.
The angular magnification M of a compound microscope is
For Your Information
defined to be the ratio tant,/tan 0, where B, is the angle
sublended by the final image of height h2 and 0 is the
angle that the object of height h would subtend at the eye If
placed at the near point d (Fig. 10.3 a) Now
tan
and
tan
tanDa
Thus, magnification
h
or
M=4
where ratio h,/h is the linear magnification M, of the
A severrauth certury microsompa
which could to noted up and down in
objective and h2/h, is the magnification M3 of the eyepiece.
is susport my (Courteal of this
Myseum if the Halory of Sciente,
Hence, total magnification is
M=MM
By Eq. 10.5 and Eq. 10.6, M, =q/p and Ms=1+ dif,
Hence,
(10.7)
it is customary to refer the values of M as multiples of 5, 10,
40 etc., and are marked as x5, x10, X 40 etc., on the
instrument.
The limit to which a microscope can be used to resolve
details, depends on the width of the objective. A wider
objective and use of blue light of short wavelength
produces less diffraction and allows more details to be
seen
219
---

Example 10.1: A microscope has an objective lons of
10 mm focal length, and an eye piece of 25.0 mm local
length. What is the distance between the lenses and its
magnification, if the object is in sharp focus when it is
10,5 mm from the objective?
Solution: If we consider the objective alone
1
+
or
4 = 210 mm
10.5 mm 1 10mm
If we consider the eye piece alone, with the virtual image at
the least distance of distinct vision a =-250 mm
1
1
1
- #
or
P = 22.7 mm
p
25 mm
Distance between Lenses=q+p=210mm+22.7mm=233mn
Magnification by objective
M.D.
210mm
=20.0
P
10.5mm
Magnification by eye piece
1
mm
Total magnification
=20 x (-11.0) = -220
-ive sign indicates that the image is virtual.
10.5 ASTRONOMICAL TELESCOPE
Telescope is an optical device used for viewing distant
objects. The image of a distant object viewed through a
telescope appears larger because it subtends a bigger
visual angle than when viewed with the naked eye. Initially
the extensive use of the telescopes was for astronomical
observations. These telescopes are called astronomical
telescopes. A simple astronomical telescope consists of
two convex lenses, an objective of long focal length 6 and
220
---

an eye piece of short local length la The objective forms a
real, inverted and diminished image AB of a distant object
AB. This real image A' BE acts as object for the eye
piece which is used as a magnifying glass The final image
seen through the eye-piece is virtual, enlarged and invorted
Fig. 10.5 shows the path of rays through an astronomical
telescope.
Rays from distant
object.ru
il
o
o
0
Fig.18.5
Ray diagram of Astronomical Telescope
When a very distant object is viewed. the rays of light
coming from any of its point (say its top) are considered
parallel and these parallel rays are converged by the
objective to form a real image A'B' at its focus. If it is
desired to see the final image through the eye-piece
without any strain on the eye, the eye-piece must be
placed so that the image A'B' lies at its focus The rays
after refraction through the eye-piece will become parallel
and the final image appears to be formed at infinity, In this
condition the image A'B' formed by the objective lies at
the focus of both the objective and the eye-piece and the
telescope is said to be in normal adjustment
Let us now compute the magnifying power of an
astronomical telescope in normal adjustment The angle a
subtended at the unaided eye is practically the same as
subtended at the objective and it is equal to < A'OB' Thus
A'B
A'8'
Ucu
OB'
4
221
---

The angle @ subtended at the eye by the final image is
equal to 2 A' O'B Thus
For Your information
Magnifying power of the telescope = =
or
M=
(10,8)
Focallength of the objective
M=
Focal length of the eyepiece
It may be noted that the distance between the objective
and eye-piece of a telescope in normal adjustment is 6+14
which equals the length of the telescope.
Besides having a high magnifying power another problem
which confronts the astronomers while designing a
telescope to see the distant planets and stars is that they
would like to gather as much light form the object as
possible. This difficulty is overcome by using the objective
of large aperture so that it collects a great amount of light
from the astronomical objects, Thus a good telescope has
an objective of long focal length and large aperture.
10.6 SPECTROMETER
Reflecting Telescope
A spectrometer is an optical device used to study spectra
Large astronomical telescopes
are reflecting type made from
from different sources of light. With the help of a
specialty shapes very large
spectrometer, the deviation of light by a glass prism and
merrore used BE obsecives With
such telescopes, entronomers can
the refractive index of the material of the prism can be
study stars which are nillions light
measured quite accurately, Using a diffraction grating, the
your away
spectrometer can be employed to measure the wave
length of the light.
The essential components of 8 spectrometer are shown in
Fig. 10,6 (a).
222
---

Source
Calificator
Oneing
Fig 10,0 (b)
Spectrometer.
Te(escope
Fis IDS (a)
Eye
Schematic diagram of a specirometer,
Collimator
it consists of a fixed metallic tube with a convex lens at one
end and an adjustable slit, that can slide in and out of the
tube, at the other end. When the sit is just at the focus of
the convex lens, the rays of light coming out of the lens
become parallel. For this reason, is is called a callimator.
Turn Table
A prism or a grating is placed on a turn table which is
capable of rotating about a fixed vertical axis. A circular
scale. graduated in half degrees, is attached with it.
Telescope
A telescope is attached with a vernier scale and is
rotatable about the same vertical axis as the turn table.
Before using a spectrometer, one should be sure that the
collimator is SO adjusted that parallel rays of light emerge
out of its convex lens The telescope is adjusted in such a
way that the rays of light entering it are focussed at the
cross wires near the eye-piece, Finally, the refracting edge
of the prism must be parallel to the axis of rotation of the
telescope so that the turn table is levelled This can be
done by using the levelling screws,
223
112
---

10.7 SPEED OF LIGHT
6
Light travels 50 rapidly that it is very difficult to measure its
T
in
speed, Gallieo was the first person to make an attempt to
a
4
measure its speed. Although he did not succeed in the
M
measurement of the speed of light, yet he was convinced
2
that the light does lake some time to travel from one place
Telemonte
to another Given below in one of the accurate methods of
determining the speed of light which is known as
Michelson's experiment
Source
In this experiment, the speed of light was determined by
of light
measuring the time it took to cover B round between two
mountains, The distance. between the two mountains was
measured accurately. The experimental set up is shown
m
in Fig 10.7
Fig 10.7
An eight-sided polished mirror M is mounted on the shaft of
Michalson's method for
a motor whose velocity can be varied Suppose the mirror
measarement of speed of light
is stationary in the position shown in the figure. A beam of
light from the face 1 of the mérror M falls of the plane mirror
m placed at a distance d from M. The beam is reflected
back from the mirror m and falls on the face 3 of the mirror
M On reflection from face 3. it enters the telescope,
If the minor M is rotataci clockwise, initially the source will
not be visible through the telescope, When the mirror M
gains a certain speed, the source S becomes visible. This
happens when the time taken by light in moving from M to
in and back to M is equal to the time taken by face 2 to
move to the position of face 1.
Angle subtended by any side of the eight-sided mirror at
the centre is 2x/8 If / is the frequency of the mirror M.
when the source 5 is visible through the telescope, then
the time taken by the mirror to rotate through an angle 2n
is 1/L So, the time taken by the mirror M to rotate through
an angle 2nd is
t=
2nf
B
of
The time taken by light for its passage from M to m and
back is 2d/c where e IS the speed of light These two times
am equal,
224
---

so
1.20
C
ca16fd
(10.9)
This equation was used to determine the speed of light by
Michelson. Presently accepted value for the speed of light
in vacuum is
on 2.99792458 X 10 ms
we usually round this off to 3.00 x10° ms
The speed of light in other materials is always less than C
In media other than vacuum, it depends upon the nature of
the medium. However, the speed of light in air is
approximately equal to that in vacuum and generally taken
so in calculations
10.8 INTRODUCTION TO FIBRE
OPTICS
Point to Ponder
For hundreds of years man has communicated using
flashes of reflected sunlight by day and lanterns by night.
Navy signalmen still use powerful blinker lights to transmit
coded messages to other ships during periods of radio-
silence. Light communication has not been confined to
simple dats and dashes. It is an interesting but little known
fact that Alexander Graham Bell invented a device known
as "photo phone" shortly after his invention of telephone
Bell's photo phone used a modulated beam of reflected
sunlight, focussed upon a Selenium detector several
hundred metres away. With the device, Bell WBS able to
transmit 6 voice message via a beam of light. The idea
Each at the this opóci -
remained dormant for many years. During the recent past
email enough in fil through the
S/E of . neede Why is the size
the idea of transmission of light through thin optical libres
of theffore Important?
has been revived and is now being used in communication
technology
The use of light as a transmission carrier wave in fibre
optica has several advantages over radio wave chriers
such as a much wider bandwidth capability and immunity
from electromagnetic interference.
225
---

It is also used to transmit light around cornom and into
inaccessible places SD that the formerly unobservable could
be viewed The use of fibre optic tools in industry is now
very common, and their importance as diagnostic tools in
medicine has been proved (Fig. 10,8 a and b).
Recently the fibre optic technology has evolved into
Fig. 10.0(a)
something much more important and useful - B
Optical Since image
communication system of enormous capabilities,
One feature of such a system is its ability to transmit
thousands of telephone conversations, several television
programs and numerous data signals between stations
through one or two flexible, hair - thin threads of optical
fibre. With the tremendous information carrying capacity
called the bandwidth, fibre optic systems have undoubtedly
made practical such services as two way television which
was too costly before the development of fibre optics
These systèms also allow word processing, image
transmitting and receiving equipment to operate efficiently,
in addition to giving an extremely wide bandwidth. the fibre
optic system has much thinner and light weight cables. An
optical fibre with its protective case may be typically 6,0 mm
in diameter, and yet it can replace B 7.62 cm diameter
bundle of copper wires now used to carry the same
amount of signals.
10.9 FIBRE OPTIC PRINCIPLES
Fig 10.0 (0)
Aprecision dismond superbrise
Propagation of light in an optical fibre requires that the light
IT eye surgery The is
should be totally confined within the libre.
obtained by light puning through If
This may be done by total internal reflection and continuous
refraction
Total Internal Reflection
One of the qualities of any optically transparent material is
the speed at which light travels within the material, i.e. it
depends upon the refractive Index ii of the material. The
index of refraction is morely the ratio of the speed of light
c in vacuum to the speed of light V in that material.
226
---

Expressed mathematically,
(10,10)
Air H,
14
The boundary between two optical media, e.g. glass and air
instructed Ray
having different refractive indices can reflect or retract light
rays The amount and direction of reflection or refraction is
determined by the amount of difference in refractive Indices
as well BS the angle at which the rays strike the boundary. Al
some angle of incidence, the angle of refraction is equal to
901 when a ray of light is passing through glass to air This
Fio 15.00
angle of incidence is called the critical angle 0, shown in
If the ange of refraction IN the 2K is
Fig. 10.9(a).We are already familiar with Snell's law
ao The angel of acidance 5 called
sin 0, = n,sin 4,
the ontice angle
From Fig. 10.9 (a), when 8,=00"
thus,
n, sin 1,=n, or sin 0.00/n,
For incident angles equal to or greater than the critical angle,
the glass - air boundary will act as a mirror and no light
escapes from the glass (Fig. 10,9 b). For glass-air boundary,
1,0
we have
sin
or a=41,8"
1.5
Let us now assume that the glass is formed into a long,
Name
round rod. We know that all the light rays striking the
Flg.10.2(b)
internal surface of the glass at angles of incidence greater
For angles of Incidence graydant
than the éstical anyle, at the light is
than 41,8" (critical angle) will be reflected back into the
relected name is intracted into the
glass, while those with angles lessthan 41,8" will escape
IR
from the glass (Fig.10.10a). Ray 1 is injected into the tod so
that it strikes the glass air boundary at an angle of incidence
about 30"
1
4
5
and tay
4
nats
3
3
2
n,41.0
Fig. 10.10 (a)
Propagation at light within a glass rod.
Outgoing
cay
Since this is less than the critical angle, it will escape from
the rod and be lost Ray 2 at 42° will be reflected back into
Incoming
my
the rod, as will ray 3 at 60' Since the angle of reflection
equals the angle of incidence, these two rays will continue
Fig. 10.10 (to)
to propogate down the rod, along paths determined by
Light propagation (thin
the original angles of incidence, Ray 4 is called an axial
flexibie glass fibre
227
---

ray since its path is parallel to the axis of the rod.
Axial rays will travel directly down this straight and rigid rod.
However, in a flexible glass fibre they will be subjected to
Clasting
the laws of reflection (Fig.10.10b).
COM
Optical fibres that propagate light by total internal reflection
are the most widely used.
(4)
Continuous Refraction
There is another mode of propagation of light through
optical fibres in which light is continuously refracted within
the fibre. For this purpose central core has high refractive
index (high density) and over it is a layer of a lower
refractive index (less density). This layer is called cladding.
Such a type of fibre is called multi-made step Index fibre
(h)
whose cross sectional view is shown in Fig.10.11(a)
Now a days, a new type of optical fibre is used in which the
Fig. 10.11
central core has high retractive index (high density) and its
Cruss sactional view of
density gradually decreases towards its periphery. This type
(a) Multi-mode step index Film
of optical fibre is called a multi mode graded Index fibre. Its
(b) Multi-modia graded Index firm
cross sectional view is shown in Fig. 10.11 (b).
In both these fibres the propagation of light signal is
through continuous refraction. We already know that a ray
a
passing from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends
2
.
away from the normal and vice versa. In step index or
graded index fibre, B ray of light entering the optical fibre,
as shown in Fig. 10.12, is continuously refracted through
these steps and is reflected from the surface of the outer
Fig. 19.12
layer. Hence light is transmitted by continuous refraction
Light propagation within
and total Internal reflection.
hypethetical muts layer form
10,10 TYPES OF OPTICAL FIBRES
There are three types of optical fibres which are classified
on the basis of the mode by which they propagate light. These
are (i) single mode step index () multi mode step index and
(iii) multi mode graded index. The term 'mode' is described
as the method by which light is propagated within the fibre,
i.e. the várious paths that light can take in travelling down
the fibre. The optical fibre is also covered by a plastic
jacket for protection.
228
---

(1)
Single Mode Step Index Fibre
Single mode or mono mode step index fibre has a very thin
Jacket
core of about 5 um diameter and has a relatively larger
cladding (of glass or plastic) as shown in Fig. 10.13. Since
Class cladding
it has a very thin core, a strong monochromatic light source
i.e., a Laser source has to be used to send light signals
Gass EXPER
through it. It can carry more than 14 TV channels or 14000
phone calls,
(a)
(D)
Multimoda Step Index Fibre
Cladding
This type of fibre has a core of relatively larger diameter such
as 50 um It is mostly used for carrying white light but due to
Comm
n
dispersion effects, it is useful for a short distance only. The
(b)
fibre core has a constant refractive index ns, such as 1.52,
Fig. 10.13
from its centre to the boundary with the cladding es shown
Single-moda step-index fitro
in Fig. 10.14. The refractive index then changes to a lower
value no. such as 1.48, which remains constant throughout
the cledding.
n,
n.
Fig. 10.04
Light propogation through Multi-made stepindea fibre.
This is called a step-index multimode fibre, because the
refractive index steps down from 1,52 to 1.48 at the
boundary with the cladding.
(iii)
Multimode Graded Index Fibre
Multi mode graded index fibre has core which ranges In
diameter from 50 to 1000 pm. II has a core of relatively high
refractive index and the refractive index decreases gradually
from the middle to the outer surface of the fibre. There is no
noticeable boundary between core and cladding This type
of fibro is called a multi mode graded-index fibre (Fig. 10.15)
and is useful for long distance applications in which white
Fig. 10.15
light is used The mode of transmission of light through this
Light propogation through Muffi-
type of fibre is also the same, i.e., continuous refraction from
made graded-inder fibre
229
---

the surfaces of smoothly decreasing refractive index and the
total Internal reflection from the boundary of the outer
surfaces.
Example 16.2 Calculate the critical angle and angle of entry
for an spocal fibere having core of retractive index 1.50 and
cladding of collactive index 1.48.
Solution We have
n. = 1.50.
FL = 1,48
54148
An
1.50
Fis 10.15
Foorn Snell's law
ain
When
So
1.50 and = 1.45 sin 901
Which gives
From the Fig 10,18,
6==00
iin B (1, 1.5
Again using Snell's law. we have
=
=
GRT
A
n
1
which gives sin or 0 = 14,23
If light beam a incident at the and of the optical libra at an
angle greater than 14.2°, total internal reflecion would not
take place.
10,11 SIGNAL TRANSMISSION AND
CONVERSION TO SOUND
A fibre optic communication system consists of three major
components (I) a transmitter that converts electrical
signals to light signals, (II) an optical fibre for guiding the
signals and (iii) a receiver that captures the light signals
al the other end of the fibre and reconverts them to
electric signale.
The light source in the transmitter can be either a
semiconductor laser or a light emitting diode (LED). With
either device, the light emitted is an invisible infra-red
signals. The typical wavelength is 1.3 um.
230
---

Such a light will travel much faster through optical fibres
than will either visible or ultra-violet light The lasers and
LEDs used in this application are tiny unes (less than half
the size of the thumbnail) in order to match the size of the
fibres. To transmit Information by light waves, whether it is
an audio signal, a telvision signal or a computer data
signal, it in necessary to modulate the light waves The
most common method of modulation is called digital
modulation in which the laser or LED is flashed on and off
al an extremely last rate A pulse of light represents the
number 1 and the absence of light represents zero. in a
sense, instaed of flashes of light travelling down the fibre,
ones (1s) and zeros (0s) are moving down the path.
Opini Nhu
Emploce
Emerican
rasino
light
light
Duta light pure
Fis. 10.17
With computer type equipment any communication can be
represented by a particular pattern or code of these is and
Ds The receiver is programmed to decodethe le and (is. this
it receives. the sound, pictures or data as required. Digital
modulation is expressed in bits ( binary digit) or megabits
(10 bite) per second, where a bit is a 1 or a 0.
Despite the ultra-purity (99.99% glass) of the optical fibre,
the light signals eventually become dim and must be
regenerated by devices called repeaters. Repeaters are
typically placed about 30km apart, but in the newer
systems they may be separated by as much as 100 km.
Al the and of the fibre. 3 photodiode converts the light
niguals, which are then amplified and decoded, if necessary,
to reconstrud the signals originally transmitted (Fig. 10.17).
10.12 LOSSES DE POWER
When a light signal travels along fibres by multiple
reflection, some light la absorbed due to impurities in the
glass Some of If B scattered by groups of atoma which are
formed al places such as joints when fibres are joined
together Careful manufacturing can reduce the power loss
by scalfering and absorption,
231
---

The information received at the other end of a fibre can be
inaccurate due to dispersion or spreading of the light signal
Also the light signal may not be perfectly monochromatic, In
such B case, a narrow band of wave-lengths are retracted in
different directions when the light signal enters the glass fibre
and the light spreads.
Fig. 10,18 (a) shows the paths of light of three different
wavelengths 23. 4 and As. la meets the core-cladding at
the critical angle and 2 andA at slightly greater angles. All
A
the rays travel along the fibre by multiple reflections as
explained earlier. But the light paths have different lengths.
(ii)
So the light of different wavelengths reaches the other end
of the fibre at different times. The signal received is,
therefore, faulty or distorted.
The disadvantage of the step-index fibro (Fig. 10.18 a) can
considerably be reduced by using a graded index fibre. As
shown in Fig. 10.18 (b). the different wavelengths still take
(b)
different paths and are totally internally reflected at
different layers, but still they are focussed at the same
Fis. 10.13
point like x and Y etc. is is possible because the speed is
Light neiths in (a) alap-indes
Inversely-proportional to the refractive index So the
and (h) graded indos tibni
wavelength 21 travels a longer path than is or kg but at a
greater speed.
Inspite of the different dispersion, all the wavelengths
arrive at the other end of the fibre at the same time With a
step-index fibre, the overall time difference may be about
33ns per km length of fibre, Using a graded index fibre, the
time difference is reduced to about 1 ns per km
SUMMARY
Least distance of distinct vision is the minimum distance from the eyes at which an
object appears to be distinct.
Magnification is the ratio of the size of the image to the Size of the object, which
equals to the ratio of the distance of the image 10 the distance of the object from
the lens or mirror.
Magnifying power or ungular magnification is the angle subtended by the image
as seen through the optical device to that subtended by the object at the unalded
eye
Resolving power is the ability of an Instrument to reveal the minor details of the
object under examination.
232
---

Simple microscope is in fact a convex lans used to help the eye to see small objects
distinctly. The magnifying power of a simple microscope is given by
M=d=1.4
Compound microscope consists of two convex lenses, an objective lens of very short
focal length and an eye piece of modernte local length. The magnifying power of a
compound microscope is given by
M⑉20-2
Telescope is an optical instrument used to sse distant object The magnifying power of
the telescope is given by
M=
Spectrométer in am aplical device used to study spectra from different sources of light.
Index of retraction is the ratio of speed of light In vecuum to the speed of light in the
material
Critical angio is the ungio of incidence in the denser medium for which the angle of
rollacion in the reror mediumis equal to 90.
When the angle of incidence becomes greater than the critical angle of that material,
the incident ray is reflected in the same material. which is called total internal
reflection
Cladding is a layer. of lowse rufractivo index (less dansity) over the contral core of
high refractive index (high density)
Mum mode step index fibro is an optical fibra in which a layer of lower retractive
index is over the central core of high retractive index
Mufti mode graded Index fibre la an optical fibre in which the central core has high
refractive index and its density gradually decreases towards itn poriphery.
QUESTIONS
10.1 What do you understand by linear magnification and angular magnification?
Explain how a convex lens is used as a magnifier?
10.2 Explain the difference between angular magnification and resolving power of an
optical instrument What limits the magnification of an optical instrument?
10.3 Why would it be advantageous to use blue light with a compound microscope?
104 One can buy a cheap microscope for use by the children. The images seen in such
a microscope have coloured edges. Why is this so?
233
---

10.5 Describe with the help of diagrams, how (a) a single biconvex lens can be used as
a magnifying glass. (b) biconvex lenses can be arranged to form a microscope.
10.0 If a person was looking through a telescope at the full moon. how would the
appearance of the moon be changed by covering half of the objective lans
107 A magnifying glass gives a five times enlarged image at a distance of 25 cm from
the lens, Find, by ray diagram, the local length of the lens.
10.8 Identify the correct answer.
(1)
The resolving power of a compound microscope depends on:
a. Length of the microscope.
b. The diameter of the objective lens.
c. The diameter of the eyepiece
d. The position of an observer's eye with regard to the eye lens
(ii)
The resolving power of an astronomical telescope depends on
a The local length of the objective lens.
b. The least distance of distinct vision of the observer
c The focal length of the eye lens.
( d. The diameter of the objective lens.
10.9 Draw skotches showing the different light palhs through a single-mode and a multi
mode fibre. Why is the single-mode fibre preferred in telecommunications?
10.19 How the light signal is transmitted through the optical fibre?
10. in How the power is lost in optical fibre through dispersion? Explain,
NUME PROBLEMS
10.1 A converging lens of focal length 5.0 cm is used as a magnifying glass If the
near point of the observer is 25 cm and the lens is held close to the eye, calculate (i)
the distance of the object from the lens (30) the angular magnification What is the
angular magnification when the final image is formed at infinity?
[Ans: (i) 4.2 cm (ii)6.0:5.0)
10.2
A telescope objective has focal length 96 cm and diameter 12 cm. Calculate the
local length and minimum diameter of a simple eye piece lens for use with the
telescope, if the linear magnification required is 24 times and all the light transmitted
by the objective from a distant point on the telescope axis is to fall on the eye piece
(Ana: 6 = 4.0 cm, da = 0,50 cm)
234
---

10.3 A telescope is made of an objective of local length 20 cm and an eye piece of
5.0cm, both convex lenses. Find the angular magnification
(Ans. 4.0)
10.4 A simple astronomical telescope in normal adjustment has an objective of focal
length 100 cm and an eye piece of focal length 5,0 cm. (i) Where is the final image
formed (ii) Calculate the angular magnification.
[Ans: (i) infinity (II) 20)
10.5 A point object is placed on the axis of and 3.6 cm froma thin convex léns of local
length 3.0 cm A second thin convex lens of focal length 16.0 cm is placed coaxial
with the first and 26.0 cm from it on the side away from the object Find the position
of the final image produced by the two lenses.
(Ans: 16 cm from second lens)
10.6 A compound microscope has lenses of focal length 1.0 cm and 3.0 cm. An object
is placed 1.2 cm from the object lens. If a virtual Image is formed, 25 cm from the
eye, calculate the separation of the lenses and the magnification of the instrument
(Ans: 8.7 cm, 47)
10.7 Sodium light of wavelength 589 nm is used to view an object under a microscope.
If the aperture of the objective is 0.90 cm, (i) find the limiting angle of resolution,
(II) using visible light of any wavelength, what is the maximum limit of resolution for
this microscope.
[Ans: (1) 8.0 x 10 rad, (ii) 5,4 x 10° rad]
10.8 An astronomical telescope having magnifying power of 5 consist of two thin lenses
24 cm apart. Find the local lengths of the lenses
[Ans: 20 cm. 4 cm)
10,9 A glass light pipe in air will totally internally reflect a light tay if its angle of incidence
is as least 39f. What is the minimum angle for total internal reflection if pipe is in
water? (Refractive Index of water = 1.33)
[Ans: 57'
10.10 The refractive index of the core and cladding of an optical fibre are 1,6 and 1,4
respectively. Calculate (i) the critical angle for the interface (ii) the maximum angle
of incidence in the air of a ray which enters the fibre and is incident at the critical
angle on the interface
(Ans: (I) 61°, (II) 51°]
235
---