
Chapter 6
FLUID DYNAMICS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able 10:
1. Understand that viscous forces in A fluid cause a retarding force on an object moving
through it
2 Use Stokes law to derive an expression for terminal velocity of a spherical body
failing through a viscous fluid under laminar conditions
3. Understand the terms steady (laminar, streamline) flow, incompressible flow, non
viscous flow as applied to the motion of an ideal fluid
4. Appreciate that at a sufficiently high velocity, the flow of viscous fluid undergoes a
transition from laminar to turbulence conditions,
5. Appreciate the equation of continuity Av It Constant for the flow of an ideal and
incompressible fluid
6: Appreciate that the equation of continuity is a form of the principle of conservation of
mass
7.
Understand that the pressure difference can arise from different rates of flow of a
fluid (Bernoulli effect).
8. Derive Bernoull's equation In form pgh = constant.
9. Explain how Bernoulli effect is applied in the filter pump. atomizers, in the
flow of air over anaerofoil, Venturimeter and in blood physics
10. Give qualitative explanations for the swing of a spinning ball.
T
he study of fluids in motion 15 relatively complicated, but analysis can be simplified by
making a few assumptions The analysis is further simplified by the use of two important
conservation principles: the conservation of mass and the conservation of energy The law of
conservation of mass gives us the equation of continuity while the law of conservation of
energy is the basis of Bernoulli's equation, The equation of continuity and the Bernoull's
equation along with their applications in aeroplane and blood circulation are discussed in this
chapter
127
---

6.1 VISCOUS DRAG AND STOKES LAW
The frictional effect between different layers of a flowing
fluid is described in terms of viscosity of the fluid. Viscosity
measures, how much force is required to slide one layer of
the liquid over another layer. Substances that do not flow
easily, such as thick tar and honey etc; have large
coefficients of viscosity, usually denoted by greek letter's
Substances which flow easily, like water, have small
coefficients of viscosity, Since liquids and gases have non
zero viscosity, a force is required if an object is to be
moved through them. Even the small viscosity of the air
causes a large retarding force on a car as it travels at high
speed. If you stick out your hand out of the window of a
fast moving car, you can easily recognize that considerable
force has to be exerted on your hand to move it through the
For Your Information
air. These are typical examples of the following fact,
Viscolities of Liquida and Gases
at 30°C
An object moving through a fluid experiences a
Viscosity
Material
retarding force called a drag force. The drag force
10" (Nam()
increases as the speed of the object increases.
As
0.019
Acetone
0.295
Methanol
00510
Even in the simplest cases the exact value of the drag
Bénzate
0.554
Water
0.801
force is difficult to calculate, However, the case of a sphere
Ethanci
1.000
moving through a fluid is of great importance.
Plasma
1.6
Glycerin
6,29
The drag force F on a sphere of radius r moving slowly with
speed V through a fluid of viscosity n is given by Stokes law
as under
F=6mmr
(6.1)
At high speeds the force is no longer simply proportional to
speed,
6.2
TERMINAL VELOCITY
Consider a water droplet such as that of fog failing
vertically, the air drag on the water droplet increases with
speed. The droplet accelerates rapidly under the over
powering force of gravity which putis the droplet downward.
However, the upward drag force on it increases as the
speed of the droplet increases. The net force on the
droplet is
128
---

Net force = Weight in Drag force
(6,2)
As the speed of the droplet continues to increase, the drag
force eventually approaches the weight in the magnitude.
Finally, when the magnitude of the drag force becomes
equal to the weight, the net force acting on the droplet is
zero. Then the droplet will fall with constant speed called
terminal velocity.
To find the terminal velocity VI in this case, we use Stokes
Law for the drag force. Equating it to the weight of the
drop, we have
mg=6xmr
or
(6.3)
Can You Da That?
The mass of the droplet is pV,
where volume v=
Substituting this value in the above equation, we get
4-20°F
(6,4)
Example 6.1: A tiny water droplet of radius 0.010 cm
A table had cart be made
descends through air from a high building. Calculate its
suspended in The stam of OF
coming from the of test
terminal velocity. Given that n for air = 19 X 10° kg m 1 5'
over
and density of water e -
Solution:
r=1.0*10*m P= 1000 kgm' 19 x 10 * kg m ¹ ⑇o
Putting the above values in Eq. 6,4
kgm
9x19x104kgm"s7
We get
Terminal Velocity 1.1 m s?
129
---

6.3 FLUID FLOW
Moving fluids are of great importance. To learn about the
behaviour of the fluid in motion, we consider their flow
through the pipes. When a fluid is in motion. its flow can be
(#)
Steamlines Cominar BPY)
eitherfstreamline or turbulent.
The flow is said to be streamline or laminar, if
Plate
every particle that passes a particular point,
moves along exactly the same path, as followed
by particles which passed that points earlier.
(b)
Turbulont flow
8.1
In this case each particle of the fluid moves along a smooth
path called a streamline as shown in Fig. 6.1 (a). The
different streamlines can not cross each other This
condition is called steady flow condition. The direction of the
streamines is the same as the direction of the velocity of the
fluid at that point. Above a certain velocity of the fluid flow,
the motion of the fluid becomes unsteady and Irregular.
Under this condition the velocity of the fluid changes
abruptly as shown in Fig 6.1 (b). in this case the exact path
For Your information
of the particles of the fluid can not be predicted.
The irregular or unsteady flow of
the fluid is called turbulent flow:
We can understand many features of the fluid in motion by
Formula One mong cars have .
considering the behaviour of a fluid which satisfies the
streamlined design
following conditions.
1
The fluid is non-viscous Le, there is no internal
frictional force between adjacent layers of fluid.
2
The fluid is incompressible, i.e., its density is constant
a
The fluid motion is steady,
Deightins have bodies
to assist thair movement in restat
6.4
EQUATION OF CONTINUITY
Consider a fluid flowing through a pipe of non-uniform size.
The particles in the fluid move along the streamlines in a
steady state flow as shown in Fig. 6.2.
130
---

in a small time AL the fluid at the lower end of the tube
moves a distance AXI, with a velocity Vy. If ALis the area of
cross section of this end, then the mass of the fluid
contained in the shaded region is:
Am=pAAX=pAXA
Where P is the density of the fluid. Similarly the fluid that
M
moves with velocity V2 through the upper end of the pipe
(area of cross section Ag) in the same time or has a mass
A
M
If the fluid is incompressible and the flow is steady, the
Fis fill
mass of the fluid is conserved. That ia, the mass that flows
into the bottom of the pipe through Ai in a time at must be
equal to mass of the liquid that flows out through A, in the
same time Therefore,
AMERAME
or
This equation is called the equation of continuity Since
density is constant for the sleady flow of incompressible
fluid, the equation of continuity becomes
Any=Aur
(6,5)
Tidbits
The product of cross sectional area of the pipe
and the fluid speed at any point along the pipo
is a constant. This constant équals the volume
flow per second of the fluid or simply flow rate:
Example: 6.2: A water hose with aninternal damelor of
20 mm at the outlet discharges 30 kg of water in 60 5
Calculate the water speed at the outlet. Assume the density
of water is 1000 kgm and its flow is sleady,
As the water lefts IN spood
Solution:
inconcern and DO its citiza socidinal
area decréases es marrimed by the
continuity egustion
Mass flow per second =
30kg = 0.5 kgs
60s
Cross sectional area A=6⑇
131
---

The mass of water discharging per second through area A is
pAv - second mass
mass
V=
second
or
pA
0.5 kgs
=
1000 kgm x3.14 (10
= 1.8ms."
6.5 BERNOULLI'S EQUATION
As the fluid moves through a pipo of verying cross section
and height, the pressure will change along the pipe.
Bernoull'a equation is the fundamental equation in fluid
dynamics that relates pressure to fluid speed and height.
In deriving Bemoulli's equation, we assume that the fluid is
incompressible, non viscous and flows in a steady state
manner. Let us consider the flow of the fluid through the
pipe in time to as shown in Fig. 6.3.
air,
A
he
Am
8
A
in
Am
The force on the upperend of the field is P.A. where P, the
pressure and A, is the area of cross section at the upper
end The work done on the fluid, by the fluid behind it, in
moving it through a distance AX will be
132
---

Similarly the work done on the fluid at the lower end is
interesting information
legal
Where P2 is the pressure, A2 is the area of cross section of
lower end and Ax2 is the distance moved by the fluid in the
same time interval E The work W2 is taken to be -ive as
this work is done against the fluid force,
The net work done = W=W,+Ws'
paint
or
*******
(6.6)
If Vr and V2 are the velocities at the upper and lower ends
respectively, then
A stream of pir passing over il hibe
dippediti a liquid will cause the liquid
32 rise in the tube as shown This
effect is used in perfume botton and
From equation of continuity (equation 6.5)
A.V.=AW
Volume of fluid
Hence,
under consideration
So, we have
Do You Know7
W=(Pi-P,)V
(6,7)
If m is the mass and e is the density then v=
So equation 6.7 becomes
w=(P,-Ps)
(6,8)
Part of this work is utilized by the fluid in changing its K.E.
and a part is used in changing its gravitational P.E.
Change in
(6.9)
Change in PE=4(PE)=mgh:mmgh
(6.10)
Where hy and h2 are the heights of the upper and lower
ends respectively.
A children works best when il is tell
and exposed to at currents which
Applying the law of conservation of energy to this, volume
reduce the pressure at the top and
of the fluid, we get
the unward time of
133
---

mgh-mgh =======
(6.11)
rearranging the equation (6,11)
This is Bernoulli's equation and is often expressed as:
(6.12)
T
the
6,6 APPLICATIONS OF BERNOULLI'S
EQUATION
by
Torricelli's Theorem
A simple application of Bemoulli's equation is shown in
Fig. 6.4. Suppose a large tank of fluid has two small
orifices A and B on it, as shown in the figure, Let us find
the speed with which the water flows from the orifice A.
Since the orifices are so small, the efflux speeds V2 and V)
For your information
will be much larger than the speed V- of the top surface of
Water
water. We can therefore, take VI as approximately zero.
Hence, Bemoulli's equation can be written BS:
egh
Air Flow
But
Pi=P2 = almospheric pressure
Therefore, the above equation becomes
(6.13)
This is Torricelli's theorem which states that:
The speed of efflux is equal to the velocity
Affirm pump has a constriction in the
central so that a jet of water from this
gained by the fluid in falling through the
lap flows faster betn. This cause it
distance (h,-ft) under the action of gravity.
drive in pressure near it and all
themsions, flows in from the side
hitre The air and water together are
impelled through the lower part of
Notice that the speed of the efflux of liquid is the same as
the pump
the speed of a ball that falls through a height (h, - h2). The
134
---

top level of the tank has moved down a little and the P.E.
has been transferred into K.E. of the efflux of fluid. If the
orifice had been pointed upward as at B shown in Fig.6.4,
this K.E. would allow the liquid to rise to the level of
water tank. In practice, viscous- energy losses would alter
the result to some extent.
Relation between Speed and Pressure of the
Fluid
A result of the Bernoull's equation is that the pressure will
D
be low where the speed of the fluid is high. Suppose that
II
water flows through a pipe system as shown in Fig. 6.5.
D
Clearly, the water will flow faster at B than it does at A or C.
Assuming the flow speed at A to be 0,20 ms and at B to be
2.0ms", we compare the pressure at B with that at A.
Fig ES
Applying Bernoull's equation and noting that the average
P.E. is the same at both places, We have,
Pe 1 . 1⑉
(6.14)
Substituting
vg-0.20ms"
Va = 2.0me
And
p = 1000 kgm
We get
- Pa= 1980 Nm
This shows that the pressure in the nerrow pipe where
streamlines are closer together is much smaller than in the
wider pipe. Thus,
Where the speed is high, the pressure will be low.
The lift on an aeroplane is due to this effect The flow of air
around an aeroplane wing is illustrated in Fig. 6.6. The wing is
designed to deflect the air so that streamines are closer
together above the wing than below it. We have seen in
Fig.6.6 that where the streamlines are forced closer together,
the speed is faster. Thus, air is travelling faster on the upper
side of the wing than on the lower. The pressure will be lower
Fig. LE
at the top of the wing. and the wing will be forced upward.
Similarly, when a tennis ball is hit by a racket in such a way
that it spins as well as moves forward, the velocity of the
135
---

air on one side of the ball increases (Fig. 6,7) due to spin
Peate -
-
and air speed in the same direction as at B and hence, the
pressure decreases. This gives an extra curvature to the
ball known as swing which deceives an opponent player.
Venturi Relation
If one of the pipes has a much smaller diameter than the
other, as shown in Fig. 6.8, we write Bemoull's equation in
Spinning kill
a more convenient form. It is assumed that the pipes are
horizontal so that pgh terms become equal and can,
therefore, be dropped. Then
Fill 43
P,
(8 15)
N
As the cross-sectional area As is small as compared to the
2
area As then from equation of continuity Vr = (A/A,) Va will
be small as compared to V2 Thus for flow from a large pipe
A
to a small pipe we can neglect Vg on the right hand side of
equation 6.15. Hence,
P,-P:=1
(6.16)
This is known as Venturi relation, which is used in Venturi-
meter, a device used to measure speed of liquid flow.
-
interésting Information
Example 6.3: Water flows down hill through a closed
Air
vertical funnel. The flow speed at the top is 12.0 cms1. The
flow speed at the bottom is twice the speed at the top. If
the funnel is 40,0 cm long and the pressure at the top is
Abmoopheric
processure
1.013 x10 ¹ Nm2, what is the pressure at the bottom?
Low
pressues
Solution: Using Bemoulli's equation
Get
Or
The carburator of a car angine uses
Venturi duct to feed the comed mis
of oir and petrol to the cylinders. Air
drawn through the duct and along
where h=h,-h:= the length of the funnel
paper to the cylinders, A any blet at
the néce of dud . last with period
The air through the duct moves very
first, grooting low pressure in the
duck, which draws petrol vispour into
the sit struem.
=1.05 x10 N m2
136
---

P - -
stricture produces a high flow speed As a result the flow is
initially turbulent.
As the pressure drops, the external pressure eventually
equals the diastolic pressure. From this point, the vessel
no longer collapse during any portion of the flow cycle. The
flow switches from turbulent to laminar, and the guigle in
the stethoscope disappears, This is the signal to record
diastolic pressure.
SUMMARY
An object moving through a fluid experiences a retarding force known as drag force;
It increases as the speed of object increases.
A sphere of radius If moving with speed Y through a fluid of viscosity 11 experiences D
viscous drag force F given by Stokes law F =
The maximum and constant velocity of an object falling vertically downward is called
terminal velocity
An ideal fluid is incompressible and has no viscosity. Both air and water at low
speeds approximate to ideal fluid behaviour.
In laminar flow, layers of fluid slide smoothly past each other
In turbulent flow there is great disorder and a constantly changing flow pattern
Conservation of mass in an incompressible fluid is expressed by the equation of
continuity Air = Airs = constant
Applying the principles of conservation of mechanical energy to the steady flow of an
ideal fluid leads to Bemoull's equation.
constant
The effect of the decrease in pressure with the increase in speed of the fluid in a
horizontal pipe is known as Venturi effect
---

Blood Flow
Blood is an incompressible fluid having a density nearly
equal to that of water. A high concentration (~50%) of red
blood cells increases its viscosity from three to five times
that of water. Blood vessels are not rigid They stretch like
a rubber hose. Under normal circumstances the volume
of the blood is sufficient to keep the vessels inflated at all
times, even in the relaxed state between heart beats, This
means there is tension in the walls of the blood vessels
and consequently the pressure of blood inside is greater
than the external atmospheric pressure. Fig. 6.9 shows
the variation in blood pressure as the heart beats, The
pressure varies from a high (systolic pressure) of 120 torn
(1 torr = 133,3 Nm2) to a low diastolic pressure) of about
75-80 tom between beats in normal, healthy person. The
numbers tend to increase with age, corresponding to the
decrease in the flexibility of the vessel walls.
The unit torr or mm of Hg is opted instead of Si unit of
pressure because of its extensive use in medical equipments.
An instrument called a sphygmomanometer measures
blood pressure dynamically (Fig. 6.10).
100
Air but
100
valve
(3)
249
100
220
H
-
180
and
MC
120
bag
Stethescope
⑉
-
as
an
401
IS
One beet
need (Text)
1
2
Time (5)
Fity 68
Fo 1,19
An inflatable bag is wound around the arm of a patient and
external pressure on the arm is increased by inflating the bag.
The effect is to squeeze the arm and compress the blood
vessels inside. When the external pressure applied becomes
larger than the systolic pressure, the vessels collapse, cutting
off the flow of the blood Opening the release valve on the bag
graduallydecreases the External pres
137
---

QUESTIONS
01 Explain what do you understand by the term viscosity?
E2 What is meant by drag force? What are the factors upon which drag force acting
upon a small sphere of radius F, moving down through a liquid, depend?
03 Why fog droplets appear to be suspended in air?
44 Explain the difference between laminar flow and turbuient flow
615 State Bemoulli's relation for a liquid in motion and describe some of its applications.
0.6 A person is standing near a fast moving train. is there any danger that he will fall
towards ii?
6.7 Identify the correct answer. What do you infer from Bemoulli's theorem?
III Where the speed of the fluid is high the pressure will be low
(1) Where the speed of the fluid is high the pressure is also high,
(40) This theorem is valid only for turbulent flow of the liquid.
5.8 Two row boats moving parallel in the same direction are pulled towards each other.
Explain
G.9. Explain, how the swing is produced in a fast moving cricket ball.
0.10 Explain the working of a carburetor of a motorcar using by Bemoulli's principle,
fill For which position will the maximum blood pressure in the body have the smallest
value. (a) Standing up right (b) Sitting (c) Lying horizontally (d) Standing on one's
head?
6.12 In an orbiting space station, would the blood pressure in major arteries in the leg
ever be greater than the blood pressure in major arteries in the neck?
NUMERICAL PROBLEMS
pa Certain globular protein particle has a density of 1246 kg m². It falls through pure
water (q=80x104 Nms) with a terminal speed of 3.0 cm h1 Find the radius of
the particle.
(Ans: 1.5x10"m)
62 Water flows through a hose, whose internal diameter is 1cm at a speed of 1ms"
What should be the diameter of the nozzle if the water is to emerge at 21ms1
(Ans: 0.2 cm)
139
---

6.3 The pipe near the lower end of a large water storage tank develops a small leak and
a stream of water shoots from it The top of water in the tank is 15m above the point
of leak.
a) With what speed does the water rush from the hole?
b) If the hole has an area of 0.060 cm2, how much water flows out in one second?
(Ans: (a) 17 (b) 102 cm³)
14 Water is flowing smoothly through 8 closed pipe system. At one point the speed of
water is 3.0ms. while at another point 3.0 m higher, the speed is 4.0 ms', If the
pressure is 80 kPa at the lower point, what is pressure at the upper point?
(Ans: 47 kPa)
6'5 An airplane wing is designed so that when the speed of the air across the top of the
wing is 450 ms'. the speed of air below the wing is 410 ms What is the pressure
difference between the top and bottom of the wings? (Density of air = 1.29kgm2)
(Ans: 2 kPa)
0.6 The radius of the aorta is about 1.0 cm and the blood flowing through it has a speed
of about 30 cms ¹ Calculate the average speed of the blood in the capillaries using
the fact that although each capillary has 8 diameter of about 8 x 10" cm, there are
literally millions of them so that their total cross section is about 2000cm2.
(Ans:5 x 10*ms`)
67 How large must a heating duct be if air moving 3.0 ms along it can replenish the air in
a room of 300 m volume every 15 min? Assume the air's density remains constant
(Ans. Radius= cm)
68 An airplane design calls for a "fift" due to the net force of the moving air on the wing of
about 1000 Nm2 of wing area. Assume that air flows past the wing of an aircraft with
streamline flow If the speed of flow past the lower wing surface is 160ms what is
the required speed over the upper surface to give 8 "lift" of 1000Nm The density of
air is 1.29kgm and assume maximum thickness of wing to be one metre.
(Ans: 165 ms
6.9 What gauge pressure is required in the city mains for a stream from a fire hose
connected to the mains to reach a vertical height of 15,0 m?
(Ans: 1,47 Pa)
140
---