CHAPTER
9   SOLUTIONS
Animation 9.1:  RAOUL T’S LAW
Source & Credit:  rasirc29.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.0.0 CONCEPT OF A SOLUTION
 Every sample of matter with uniform properties and a ixed composition  is called a phase. 
For example, water at room temperature and normal pressure exists as a single liquid phase, that 
is, all the properties of water are uniform throughout this liquid phase. If a small amount of sugar 
is added to this sample of water, the sugar dissolves but the sampl e remains as a single liquid pha.
se. However, the properties and composition of this new liquid phase, now the sugar solution, are 
diferent from those of pure water. As this solution of sugar in water  is containing two substances 
(binary solution), so it is a mixture and since its properties a re uniform, therefore, it is homogeneous 
in character.
 A solution, on average, is a homogeneous mixture of two or more kinds of  diferent molecular 
or ionic substances.  The substance which is present in large quantity is called a  solvent and the 
other component in small quantity is called a solute. 
 For a given solution, the amount of solute dissolved in a unit volume of  solution (or a unit 
amount of solvent) is termed as the concentrat ion of the solution. Solutions  containing relatively 
lower concentrations of solute are called dilute solutions, whereas those containing relatively higher 
concentrations of solutes are called concentrated solutions.
Animation 9.2: CONCEPT OF A SOLUTION
Source & Credit: employees.csbsju39.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.1.0 CONCENTRATION UNITS OF SOLUTIONS
 There are various types of concentration units of solutions. They are discussed as follows.
9.1.1 Percentage composition
 The amounts of solute and solvent can be expressed in percentage compos ition by four 
diferent ways.
a.  Percentage weight/weight   
b.  Percentage weight/volume
c.  Percentage volume/weight   
d.  Percentage volume/volume
Animation 9.3: CONCENTRATION UNITS OF SOLUTIONS
Source & Credit: chempaths.chemeddl49.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
(a )  Percentage weight / weight
 It is the weight of a solute dissolved per 100 parts by weight of solution. 5% w/w sugar solution 
will contain 5 g of sugar dissolved in 100 g of solution in w ater. This solution contains 95 g of water.
  Mass of solute% by weight = x100Mass of solution
Example (1):
 Calculate the percentage by weight of NaCl, if 2.0g of NaCl is  dissolved in 20 g of water.
Animation 9.4: Percentage composition
Source & Credit: dynamicscience59.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Solution:
   Weight of NaCl         = 2.0g
   Weight of sovent        = 20.0g
   Weight of solution       = 20+2 = 22g
   2.0g% of NaCl by weight     = x100               =9.09%  Answer22.0g
(b )  Percentage Weight/Volume
 It is the weight of a solute dissolved per 100 parts by volume of solu tion.  10 g of  glucose 
dissolved in 100 cm3 of solution is 10% w/v solution of glucose. The quantity of the solven t is not 
exactly known. In such solutions, the total volume of the solution is u nder consideration.
(c)  Percentage Volume /Weight
 It is the number of cm3 of a solute dissolved per 100 g of the solution.  If we dissolve 10 cm3 of 
alcohol in water and the total weight of the solution is 100 g, then i t is 10% v/w solution of alcohol 
in water. In such type of solutions, we don’t know the total volume of th e solution.
(d)  Percentage Volume / Volume
 It is the volume of a solute dissolved per 100 cm3 of the solution.  This unit of concentration 
is best applicable to the solutions of liquids in liquids. A 1 2 % alcohol beverage is 12 cm3 of alcohol 
per 100 cm3 of solution. In such solutions, the total volume of the solution may not be necessarily 
equal to the sum of volumes of solute and the solvent.
9.1.2 Molarity (M)
 Molarity is the number of moles of solute dissolved per dm3 of the solution. To prepare one 
molar solution of glucose in water, we take 180 g of glucose and a dd suicient water to make the 
total volume 1 dm3 (llitre) in a measuring lask.69.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 In case of one molar solution of sucrose, 
342 g of sucrose are dissolved in water  to make 
it 1 dm3. Since the volume of 342 g of sucrose is 
greater than 180 g of glucose so the volume of 
water in 1 molar sucrose solution is less than that 
of 1 molar glucose solution. Anyhow, to calculate 
the volume of the solvent, we need to know the 
density of the solute. Following formula is used to 
prepare the solution of any molarity.
  3Mass of solute 1Molarity(M) = xMolar mass of solute Volume of soultion ( dm ) 
 or
  3Number of moles of soluteMolarity(M) =Volume of soultion (dm )
Examples (2):
 Calculate the molarity of a solution containing 20.7 g of K2CO3 dissolved in 500 cm3 of the 
given solution.
Solution:
   23 Mass of K CO  =20.7g
   1
23 Molar mass of K CO  =138gmol−
   33volume of solution = 500cm  = 0.5dm
Formula:  3Mass of solute 1Molarity = xMolar mass of solute Volume of soultion i n dm
   
  -3 -3
-1 320.7g 1Molarity=  x    =0.3mol dm   =0.3mol dm  An swer138gmol 0.5dm
Animation 9.5: Molarity (symbol, M )
Source & Credit: chembuddy79.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.1.3 Molality (m)
 Molality is the number of moles of solute in 1000 g (1 kg) of th e solvent. In order to prepare 
molal solutions, we don’t have to take any lask. 180 g of glucose w hen dissolved in 1000 g of water 
gives one molal solution of glucose. The total mass of the solution is 1 180 g. We don’t know the 
volume of the solution. In order to know the volume we need the density of the s olution. For one 
molal sucrose solution, 342 g of sucrose are dissolved in 1000 g  of H2O.
 So,one molal solution of diferent solutes in water have their own masses  and volumes.
 In order to get the molality of any solution, we use the following equa tion.
    Mass of solute 1Molality(m) = xMolar mass of solute Mass of solvent in k g
  or
  Number of moles of soluteMolality(m) =Mass of solvent in kg
Example (3):
 What is the molality of a solution prepared by dissolving 5g of toluene (C7H8) in 250g of 
benzene.
Solution:
 Mass of toluene = 5g
 Mass of benzene = 250g = 0.25kg
 Molar mass of toluene = 12x7+1x8=92
Formula used
          
  Mass of solute 1Molality(m) = xMolar mass of solute Mass of solvent in k g89.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
  -15g 1Molality(m) = x92g mol 0.250 kg
  -1 -1 5= mol kg = 0.217mol kg  Answer92x0.25
    
      =0.217m
 The molality of a solution is indirect expression of the ratio of the moles of the solute to 
the moles of the solvent. The molal aqueous solution of a solute say gluc ose or NaOH is dilute in 
comparison to its molar solution. The reason is that in molal soluti on the quantity of the solvent is 
comparatively greater.
 The value of concentration given in the units of molality does not chan ge with temperature 
but that of molarity does. The reason is that the volume of liquids ar e afected by the variation in 
temperature.
9.1.4. Mole Fraction (x)
 This unit of concentration may be for any type, of solution i.e. ga s in gas, liquid in liquid or 
solid in liquid, etc. This unit is also applicable to a solu tion having more than two components.
 The mole fraction of any component in a mixture is the ratio of the nu mber of moles of it to 
the total number of moles of all the components present.
 Let there be three components A, B, C making a solution. The number of moles are na, nb, nc 
respectively. If the mole fraction of A, B and C are denoted by xa, xb, xc respectively, Then,
      A
A
ABCnX=n  + n  + n
    
      B
B
ABCnX=n  + n  + n
      C
C
ABCnX=n  + n  + n
 The sum of the mole fractions of all the components of a solution mus t be equal to one. There 
are no formal units of mole fraction. Anyhow, we sometimes multiply  mole fraction by 100 to get 
mole percent.99.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Example (4):
 Calculate the mole fraction and mole percent of each component in a s olution having 92 g of 
ethyl alcohol, 96 g of methyl alcohol and 90 g of water.
Solution:
 First of all get the number of moles of each component.
 Mass in grams of the substanceNumber of moles of the substance         = Molecular mass in grams
  -1
25 Molar mass of ethyl alchohol (C H OH)    =  46 gmol
  -192gNumber of moles of ethyl alchohol     = = 2 mol46 gmol
  -1
3 Molar mass of methyl alchohol (CH OH)    = 32 gmol
   
  -196gNumber of moles of methyl alchohol     =  = 3 mol32 gmol
  -1
2 Molar mass of water(H O)         = 18 gmo l
  -190gNumber of moles of water          =   = 5 mol18 gmol
 The mole fraction of any components is ratio of its moles to total numb er of moles.
   ethyl alcohol22X   =   =  = 0.2  Answer2+3+5 10
   methyl alcohol32X   =   =  = 0.3 Answer2+3+5 10
   2HO55X   =   =  = 0.5 Answer2+3+5 10
 Now, multiply the mole fractions with 100, to get mole percent.
Animation 9.6: Mole Fraction (symbol, 
x)
Source & Credit: ima.umn109.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
   Moles % of ethyl alcohol = 0.2x100 = 20 Answer
   Moles % of methyl alcohol = 0.3x100 = 30  Answer
   2 Moles % of H O = 0.5x100 = 50 Answer
 In the  case of mixture of gases, one can determine the mole fraction from the partial pressure 
data of the mixture. Hence
   A
A
ABCpX=p +p +p B
B
ABCp,X =p +p +p C
C
ABCp,X =p +p +p
Where pa, pb, pc are the partial pressures of various gases in the mixture.
 Generally, we can say that
  Partial pressure of that gasMole fraction of any gas= Total pressure of the mixture of gases
9.1.5. Parts Per Million (ppm)
 It is deined as the number of parts (by weight or volume) of a solu te per million parts (by 
weight or volume) of the solution. 
 This unit is used for very low concentrations of solutions, e.g. to express the impurities of 
substances in water.
  
 6 Mass of soluteParts per million (ppm) =   x 10Mass of solution
Example (5):
 Sea water has 5.65 x 10-3 g of dissolved oxygen in one kg of water. Calculate the concentration 
of oxygen in sea water in parts per million
   -3
6 5.65x10 gppm of oxygen in sea water    =   x 10 =5.65 ppm  Answer1000g119.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.1.6 Interconversion of Various Concentration Units  of Solutions
 Sometimes, we get prepared solutions from the chemical supply houses . For example, 
we are working with a solution whose molarity is given by the supp lier, but we need to know its 
molality or w/w percentage. For such purpose, we need to convert one uni t of concentration into 
other. These conversions are usually done if we know the formula mas ses and the densities of the 
solutes or solutions. Following table shows the ive important chemicals  whose w/w%, molarities 
and densities are given. 
Animation 9.7: Parts Per Million (symbol, p p m)
Source & Credit: media.tumblr129.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
                  
   
One should be able to interconvert these concentration 
units into each other and moreover to molalities and mole 
fractions for laboratory work Let us do some calculations in 
this respect.
Example (6):
 Calculate the molality of 8% w/w NaCl solution.
 It means that 0.1367 moles of NaCl is dissolved in 0.092 kg of water.
  Number of moles of solute 0.1367 molesMolality(m)= =Mass of solvent in kg 0.092 kg
      =1.487 m  Answer
 The given solution is 1.487 molal.Name
of Acid%
(w/w)Molarity
(M dm-3)Density
(gcm-3)
H2SO4
H3PO4
HNO3
HCl
CH3COOH98%
85.5%
70.4%
37.2%
99.8%18
4.8
15.9
12.1
17.41.84
1.70
1.42
1.19
1.05
Animation 9.8: Interconversion of Various Concentra tion Units of Solutions
Source & Credit: mechanicaldesignforum139.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Example (7):
 Hydrochloric acid available in the laboratory is 36% (w/w).  The density of HCl solution is 1.19 
g cm-3. Determine the molarity of HCl solution.
Solution:
36% (w/w) HCl solution means that 36g of HCI dissolved in 100 g of solution.
   Mass of HCl                  =36g
   Mass of solution            =100g
 In case  of molarity, the inal volume of solution is 1000 cm3. Convert this volume into mass, 
by using density of 1.19 gcm-3.
   3Mass of 1000cm  of HCl solution     =1000x1.19   =1190g
   Since,    (Mass=volume x density)
  100g of solution has HCl     =36g
  1190x36so, mass of HCl in 1190g of solution    =   =428.4g100g
  -1Molar mass of HCl           =36.5g mol
  -1428.4gNumber of moles of HCl, in 428.4g of HCl    =    =11.7336.5gmol
  So, 1000 cm3 solution of HCl has 11.73 moles of HCl
  Hence, molarity of HCl =11.73mol dm-3
  Answer
Example (8):
 9.2 molar HClO4 is available in the market. The density of this solution is 1.54 gcm3. What is the 
percentage by weight of HClO4.149.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Solution:
  Molarity of HClO4    = 9.2g moles dm-3
  Density of solution    = 1.54 gcm-3
Let us calculate the mass of solution which is 1dm3 in volume and has 9.2moles of HClO4 in it.
  Since,  Mass    = volume x density
  Mass of 1000cm3 solution    3 -3=1000cm x1.54gcm =1540g
  Molar mass of HCIO4    =100.5gm mol-1
  9.2 moles of HCIO4 , can be converted to its mass
  Mass of HCIO4      -1=100.5g mol  x 9.2mol = 924.6 g
  Mass of H20 = mass of solution - mass of HCIO4 = 1540-924.6 = 615.4 g
  % of HCIO4 by weight    4 mass of HClO 924.6= x100= x100 =60.04mass of solution 1540g
  % of H2O by weight = 100-mass of HClO4 =100-60.04= 39.96 Answer
9.2  TYPES OF SOLUTIONS
 Most commonly, we come across solutions, where solute is a solid an d the solvent is a liquid. 
As a matter of fact, all the three states of matter i.e. solid, liquid  or gas can act as solute or solvent. 
Examples for nine possible types of solution are given in Table (9 .2).159.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
State of Solute State of Solvent Example
Gas
Gas
Gas
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
Solid
SolidGas
Liquid
Solid
Gas
Liquid
Solid
Liquid
Gas
SolidAir
O2 in water, CO2 in water.
H2 adsorbed by palladium
Mist, fog, clouds, liquid air pollutants.
Alcohol in water, milk, benzene in toluene.
Mercury in silver, butter, cheese.
Sugar in water, jellies, paints.
Dust particles in smoke.
Metal alloys pearls, opals, carbon in iron (steel).
9.2.1 Solutions of Solids in Liquids
 When a solid comes in contact with a suitable liquid, it diss olves forming a solution i.e. a 
homogeneous mixture. This process of dissolution can be explained i n terms of attraction between 
the particles of a solute and that of a solvent. The molecules or ions i n solids are arranged in such 
a regular pattern that the inter-molecular or inter-ionic forces are a t a maximum. Table (9.2) Common types and examples of solutions
Animation 9.9:TYPES OF SOLUTIONS
Source & Credit: blobs169.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
The process of dissolution is to overcome these forces of attraction holding  together the solute 
molecules or ions in the crystal lattice, by the solute-solvent forces. I n molecular crystals, the inter-
molecular forces of attraction are either dipole-dipole or London disper sion type. These forces 
are relatively weak and can easily be overcome. Hence, non-polar or l ess polar molecular crystals 
usually dissolve in non-polar solvents like benzene.
 In the  crystal lattice, the inter-molecular or inter-ionic forces of  attraction between highly polar 
molecules or ions are quite strong, hence the polar solids fail to di ssolve in nonpolar solvents. These 
strong electrostatic forces cannot be overcome or shattered by the weak solute-s olvent attractions. 
Take the case of cane sugar. Due to hydrogen bonding, it has tightl y bound molecules, so it will not 
be dissolved by solvents like kerosene oil, petrol, benzene, etc. It will be dissolved readily in water, 
because water attracts sugar molecules almost in the same way as th e sugar molecules attract one 
another. 
 The inter-ionic forces of attraction are very strong in ionic solids  so, equally strong polar 
solvents are needed to dissolve them. Such solids cannot be dissolved by moderately polar solvents 
e.g. acetone. A moderately polar solvent, fails to dissolve sodium chlor ide, which is an ionic solid. 
Thus the solubility principle is that “ like dissolves like’ .
9.2.2 Solutions of Liquids in Liquids
 The solutions of liquids in liquids may be divided into three c lasses.
Animation 9.10: Solutions of Solids in Liquids
Source & Credit: employees.csbsju179.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
(i)  Completely Miscible Liquids
 Liquids like alcohol and water or alcohol and ether mix in al l proportions. However, the 
properties of such solutions are not strictly additive. Generally, the vol ume decreases on mixing 
but in some cases it increases. Heat may be evolved or absorbed durin g the formation of such 
solutions. These types of solutions can usually be separated by fr actional distillation.
(ii)  Partially Miscible Liquids
 A large number of liquids are known which dissolve into one an other up to a limited extent. 
For example, ether 25 25CH O CH −−  dissolves water to the extent of about 1.2 % and water dissolves 
ether up to the extent of about 6.5%.
 As the mutual solubilities are limited, the liquids are only pa rtially miscible. On shaking equal 
volumes of water and ether, two layers are formed. Each liquid lay er is a saturated solution of the 
other liquid. Such solutions are called conjugate solutions. The m utual solubility of these conjugate 
solutions is afected by temperature changes. Typical examples of s uch systems are:
a.  Phenol-water system
b.  Triethylamine-water system
c.  Nicotine-water system
Animation 9.11: Solutions of Liquids in Liquids
Source & Credit: chem.purdue189.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Phenol-Water System (H2O + C6H5OH )
 The example of phenol in water is interesting. If equal volumes of water and phenol are 
mixed together, they show partial miscibility. It has been observed th at around room temperature, 
phenol will dissolve in a lot of water giving us the upper layer a nd water will dissolve in a lot of 
phenol giving us the lower layer.
 At 250C the upper layer is 5% solution of phenol in water and the lower l ayer is 30% water in 
phenol. These two solutions are conjugate solutions to each other. The lower  layer has a greater 
density due to greater percentage of phenol. Water acts as a solute in th e lower layer while phenol 
is a solute in the upper layer. When the temperature of water-phenol sy stem is increased, the 
compositions of both layers change. Water starts travelling from upp er to the lower layer and 
phenol travels from lower to the upper layer.
 When the temperature of this system approaches 65.90C, a homogeneous mixture of two 
components is obtained. This homogeneous mixture contains 34% phenol and 66% water. The  
temperature of 65.90C at which two conjugate solutions merge into one another, is called c ritical 
solution temperature or upper consulate temperature. Some other partially miscible pairs of liquids 
have their own consulate temperatures with deinite compositions.
 For example, water-aniline system has a single layer at 167.00 C with 15% water. Methanol-
cyclohexane system has consulate temperature of 49.10 C with 29% methanol.
(iii)  Liquids Practically Immiscible
 Those liquids which do not dissolve into each other in any proporti on are immiscible.
 Examples:  (i) Water and benzene (H20 + C6H6)
   (ii) Water and carbon disulphide (H2O + CS2)
9.3.0 IDEAL AND NON-IDEAL SOLUTIONS
When two or more than two liquid substances are mixed, the solutions may be ideal or non-ideal.
To distinguish between such solutions we look at the following aspects :-199.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 i.  If the for ces of interactions between the molecules of diferent comp onents are same as 
when they were in the pure state, they are ideal solutions, otherwise non- ideal.
 ii.  If the volume  of solution is not equal to the sum of the individ ual volumes of the components, 
the solution is non-ideal.
 iii. Ideal solutions have zero enthalpy change as their heat of sol ution.
 iv. If the  solutions obey Raoult’s law, then they are ideal. This  is one of the best criterion for 
checking the ideality of a solution
 Let us irst study, the  Raoults’s law and then try to understand ideality of solutions, the 
process of fractional distillation and the formation of azeotropes.
Animation 9.12: Ideal and Non-Ideal Solutions
Source & Credit: wikipedia209.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.3.1 RAOULT’S LAW
 Raoult’s law can be deined in these ways:
 The vapour pressure ol a solvent above a solution is equal to the product of the vapour 
pressure of pure solvent and the mole fraction of solvent in solution.
 Mathematically, it can be written in equation form as follows:
    o
1p = p x                           ...............     (1)
Where  p is the vapour pressure of solvent in the solution, p° is the va pour pressure of pure solvent 
and x1 is the mole fraction of solvent.
 We also known that
 12X  + X  = 1  (x2 is the mole fraction of solute)
 or     12X  = 1 - X
 Putting the value of x1 in equation (1)
     o
2 p = p (1 - X )
 or     oo
2 p = p  - p X
 or     oo
2 p -p = p X
 or     o
2p = p X .................(2)∆
 Equation (2) gives another  deinition of Raoult’s law.  “The lowering of vapour pressure is 
directly proportional to the mole of fraction of solute.”  Now rearrange equation (2) to get equation 
(3).
2op=X ................ (3)p∆219.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
    
	∆ p/p° is called relative lowering of vapour pressure and it is mor e important than actual 
lowering of vapour pressure ( ∆p). The equation (3) gives us another deinition of Raoult’s law.  “The  
relative lowering of vapour pressure is equal to the mole fraction of sol ute”.
 The relative lowering of vapour pressure:
(i)  is independent of the temperature
(ii)  depends upon the concentration of solute.
(iii)  is constant when equimolecular proportions of diferent solutes  are dissolved in the 
same mass of same solvent.
Animation 9.13: RAOULT’S LAW
Source & Credit: rasirc229.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Example (9):
 The vapour pressure of water at 30° C is 28.4 torr. Calculate th e vapour pressure of a solution 
containing 70g of cane sugar (C12H22O11) in 1000g of water at the same temperature. Also calculate 
the lowering of vapour pressure.
Solution:
 Mass of cane sugar dissolved       =70g
 Molar mass of cane sugar        -1= 342 g mole
 Number of moles of a compound      mass= molar mass
 Number of moles of sugar, C12H22O11 (n2)     70g=    =0.20342g/mol
 Mass of H2O in solution        =1000g
 Number of moles of water, H20 (n1)      1000g=     =55.4918.02g/mol
 Total number of moles        = 0.20 + 55.49= 55.69
 Mole fraction of sugar, C12H22O11(x2)      2
12n 0.2= 0.0036n +n 55.69= =
 Mole fraction of water, H2O (x1)       1
12n 55.49= 0.9964n +n 55.69= =
 Vapour pressure of pure water       =28.4 torr
 Applying the formula for vapour pressure of solution
           o
1p  = p X  = (28.4)(0.9964)  =28.29 torr
 So, vapour pressure of solution      = 28.29 torr  Answer
 Lowering of vapour pressure, ∆p     = 28.4 - 28.29 = 0.11 torr  Answer239.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.3.2 Raoult’s Law (when both components are volatile )
 Raoult’s law can be applied to understand the relationship between mole fractions of two 
volatile components and their vapour pressures before making the solution  and after making the 
solution. Consider two liquids ‘A’ and ‘B’ with vapour pressur es p°A and p°B in the pure state at a 
given temperature. After making the solution, the vapour pressures of both  liquids are changed. 
Let the vapour pressures of these liquids in solution state be pA and pB with their mole fractions xA 
and xB respectively.
 Applying Raoult’s law to both components
  o
A AAp =p x
  o
B BBp =p x 
  oo
t A B AA BBP=p +p =p x +p x where Pt is total vapour pressure)
since  ABx +x =1
  BAx =1-x
  oo
t AA B AP = p x  + p (1 - x )
  o oo
t AA B BAP = p x  + p  - p x
  oo o
t A BA BP = (p  - p )x  +  p ............ (4)
 The  component A is low boiling liquid and B is high boili ng liquid. The vapour pressure of A 
is more than B at a given temperature.
 Equation (4) is a equation of straight line If a graph is p lotted between xBor mole % of B on 
x-axis and Pt on y-axis, a straight line will be obtained Fig (9.1).
 Only  those pairs of liquids give straight lines which form i deal solutions. So, Raoult’s law is 
one of the best criterion to judge whether a solution is ideal or not.249.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
All the  possible solutions of two components A and B have their vapour  pressures on the straight 
line connecting p°A with p°B. All such solutions will be ideal. Each point on this straig ht line represents 
the vapour pressure of a solution, at a given temperature, with the corres ponding contribution of 
both the components A and B. The two dotted lines represent the partial pr essures of the individual 
components of solution. They show the increase of vapour pressure of a component with increase 
in its mole fraction in solution.
 In order to explain it, consider a point G on the straight line. Th is point represents the vapour 
pressure of solution with 30% moles contribution of the component B and  70% of component A.
 Since, A is more volatile component, so its contribution towards the vap our pressure of 
solution is represented by pA. 
 The contribution of the less volatile component B is represented by pB. Similarly, we can 
calculate the relative contributions of A and B towards the total vapour pressure of solution by 
taking other points along the line joining po
A to po
B.
 The total vapour pressure of the solution (Pt) corresponding to the point G will be equal to the 
sum of the vapour pressures of the individual components (pA + pB) as shown in the Fig. (9.1).Fig. (9.1) Graph between composition
and vapour pressure259.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.4  VAPOUR PRESSURES OF LIQUID -LIQUID SOLUTIONS
 Binary mixtures of miscible liquids may be classiied as ( i) ideal (ii) non-ideal or real solutions.
 The vapour pressures of solutions provides a simple picture about th eir behaviour. Let us 
discuss the vapour pressures of ideal and real solutions one by on e.
(i)  Ideal solutions
 An ideal solution is that which obeys Raoult’s law.  Some typical ideal solution forming liquid 
pairs are: benzene-toluene, benzene-ether, chlorobenzene-bromobenzene, ethyl  iodide-ethyl 
bromide, etc.
Animation 9.14:VAPOUR PRESSURES OF LIQUID LIQ-
UID SOLUTIONS
Source & Credit: chem.purdue269.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Fractional Distillation of Ideal Mixture of Two Liqui ds
 Let us have two liquids A and B which form a completely misci ble solution. A is a more volatile 
component so its boiling point is less than B. If we have various s olutions of these two components 
and a graph is plotted between compositions on x-axis and temperatur e on y-axis, then two curves 
are obtained as shown in the Fig. (9.2). 
 The  upper curve represents the composition of the vapours of diferent sol utions while the 
lower curve represents the composition of the liquid mixtures. The reason  is that at any temperature 
the composition of vapou rs is d ife r e n t from the composition of li quid mixture.
 Consider the temperature, corresponding to the point G. It is the boiling  point of solution 
corresponding to composition I. It  meets liquid curve at point H and  the vapour curve at the point 
C. The composition of liquid mixture corresponding to the point H is  shown by the point I. At point I 
the mixture has greater percentage of B and less percentage of A. Whi le at the same temperature the 
vapours of the mixture have the composition K. At the point K, the percentag e of A is comparatively 
greater than B when we compare it with composition of liquid mixtur e corresponding to point I. 
Because A is a low boiling liquid, it is present in the vapour state in greater percentage than at point 
I.
Fig (9.2) Composition - temperature curve of an ideal so lution.279.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 If the  temperature of the mixture is maintained corresponding to poin t G, the distillate will 
have greater percentage of A and the residue will have greater percentage of B. The reason is that 
the fraction going to distillate is that which is in vapour state an d it has greater % of A. The distillate 
of composition K is again subjected to distillation. Its boiling p oint is X, and at this temperature the 
distillate of composition Z is obtained. This distillate of compositi on Z is further distilled. In this way, 
the distillate becomes more and more rich in A and residue is more and more rich in B. So, process 
of distillation is repeated again and again to get the pure component A. Thus we can completely 
separate the components by fractional distillation.  Such liquid mixtures, which distil with a change 
in composition, are called zeotropic mixtures.  For example, methyl alcohol-water solution can be 
separated into pure components by distillation.
ii.  Non-Ideal Solutions (azeotropic mixtures)
 Many solutions do not behave ideally. They show deviations from Raou lt’s Law due to 
diferences in their molecular structures i.e. size, shape and in termolecular forces. Formation of 
such solutions is accompanied by changes in volume and enthalp y. The vapour pressure deviations 
may be positive or negative in such solutions.
 Azeotropic mixtures are those which boil at constant temperature and di stil over without 
change in composition at any temperature like a pure chemical comp ound.  Such mixtures can not 
be regarded as chemical compounds as changing the total pressur e alongwith the boiling point 
changes their composition. Whereas, for a chemical compound, the c omposition remains constant 
over a range of temperature and pressure.
 The deviations of solutions are of two types:
 (a)  Positive deviations
 (b)  Negative deviations
(a)  Positive Deviations
 If a graph is plotted between composition and vapour pressure of a solution which shows 
positive deviation from Raoult’s law, the total vapour pressure curve ris es to a maximum. The vapour 
pressure of some of solutions are above the vapour pressure of either of the pure components.289.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 Let us consider the mixture of A and B components at point C in Fi g (9.3 ). At the point C Fig 
(9.3 ), the mixture has the highest vapour pressure and, therefore, the lowest, boiling point.
 On distilling this type of solution, the irst fraction will be a  constant boiling point mixture 
i.e. azeotropic mixture having a ixed composition corresponding to the maximum point. For this 
type of solution, it is not possible to bring about complete separation of  components by fractional 
distillation. Ethanol-water mixture is an example of this type. It boils at 78.1°C with 4.5% water and 
95.5 % alcohol. 78.1oC is lower than the boiling point of ethanol (78.5°C) and water ( 100°C).
(b)  Negative Deviations
 For this type of solution, the vapour pressure curve shows a minimu m. Let us consider a point 
E in Fig (9.3). Here, the more volatile component A is in excess. O n distilling this solution, the vapours 
will contain more of A and the remaining mixture becomes richer i n less volatile component B’. 
Finally, we reach the point D where vapour pressure is minimum a nd the boiling point is maximum. 
At this point, the mixture will distill over unchanged in compositi on.
 Therefore, it is  not possible to separate this type of solution completely  into its components. 
We can give the example of hydrochloric acid solution in water for this type of solutions. HCl forms 
an azeotropic mixture with water, boiling at 110oC and containing 20.24% of the acid.Fig (9.3 ) Non-ideal solutions and azeotropic mixtures for  positive deviation299.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.5  SOLUBILITY AND SOLUBILITY CURVES
 Whenever a solid solute is put in a liquid solvent then the molecules or ions break away 
from the surface of the solid and pass into the solvent. These particl es of solid are free to difuse 
throughout the solvent to give a uniform solution. The solute and solvent molec ules are constantly 
moving about in the solution phase because of kinetic energy possessed by them. In this way some 
of the particles of the solute may come back towards the solid due to col lisions. These molecules 
or ions are entangled in its crystal lattice and get deposited on it. This is called re-crystallization 
or precipitation.If excess of solid is present in the solution then the rate of dissolution and rate of 
crystallization become equal. This is a state of dynamic equili brium.
 The  concentration of the solute at equilibrium with the solution is c onstant for a particular 
solvent and at a ixed temperature. The solution thus obtained is called  saturated solution of the 
solid substance and the concentration of this solution is termed as i ts solubility.
So the solubility is  deined as the concentration 
of the solute in the solution when it is in 
equilibrium with the solid substance at a 
particular temperature.
 Solubility is expressed in terms of number 
of grams of solute in 1000g of solvent. At a 
particular temperature, saturated solution of 
NaCl in water at 0°C contains 37.5g of NaCl in 
lOOg of water. Similarly  the solubility of CuSO4 
in water at 0°C is 14.3g/100g, while at 100°C it 
is 75.4g/100g.
 To determine the  solubility of substance, 
a saturated solution of a solid is prepared at 
a constant temperature. Then this solution 
is iltered. A known volume of this solution is 
evaporated in a china dish and from the mass 
of the residue, the solubility can be calculated.
Animation 9.15: SOLUBILITY AND SOLUBILITY CURVES
Source & Credit: dynamicscience309.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Solubility Curves
 Temperature has a marked efect on the solubility of many substanc es. A graical representation 
between temperature and solubility of solution is called solubility c urves.There are two types of 
solubility curves.
(a)  Continuous solubility curves
(b)  Discontinuous solubility curves
(a)  Continuous Solubility Curves
 Continuous solubility curves don’t show sharp breaks anywhere. According to Fig.(9.4). KCIO3, 
K2Cr2O7, Pb(NO3)2 and CaCI2 are showing continuous solubility curves. The solubility curves of KCl, 
NaCl and NaNO3 give the straight lines. NaCl shows a very small change of solu bility from 0°C to 
100°C increase of temperature. 
 Ce2(SO4)3 shows the exceptional behaviour whose solubility decreases with the in crease in 
temperature and becomes constant from 40°C onwards. Anyhow, it show s continuous solubility 
curve.
Fig (9.4) Continuous solubility curves319.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
(b)  Discontinuous Solubility Curves
 Sometimes, the solubility 
curves show sudden changes of 
solubilities and these curves are 
called discontinuous solubility 
curves. The best examples in 
this reference are Na2SO4.10 H20, 
CaCl2.6 H2O. Actually, these curves 
are combination of two or more 
solubility curves. At the break 
a new solid phase appears and 
another solubility curve of that new 
phase begins. It is the number of 
molecules of water crystallization 
which changes and hence solubility 
changes, Fig (9.5).
9.5.1 Fractional Crystallisation
 The curves in Fig (9.4) show that the variation in solubility w ith temperature is diferent for 
diferent substances. For example, the change in solubility in ca se of KNO3 is very rapid with changing 
temperature, while such a change is more gradual in other cases like KBr, KCl, alanine, etc.
These diferences in the behaviour of compounds provide the basis for  fractional crystallisation, 
which is a technique for the separation of impurities from the chem ical products.
 By using  the method, the impure solute is dissolved in a hot solvent in which the desired solute 
is less soluble than impurities. As the hot solution is cooled, the d esired solute being comparatively 
less soluble, separates out irst from the mixture, leaving impurities  behind. In this way, pure desired 
product crystallizes out from the solution.Fig (9.5) Discontinuous solubility curves329.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.6  COLLIGATIVE PROPERTIESOF SOLUTIONS
 The colligative properties are the properties of solution that depend on the number of solute 
and solvent molecules or ions. Following are colligative properties of d ilute solution.
(i)  Lowering of vapour pressure
(ii)  Elevation of boiling point
(iii)  Depression of freezing point
(iv)  Osmotic pressure
Animation 9.16: Fractional  Crystallisation
Source & Credit: mind42339.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The practical applications of colligative properties are numerous.  The study of colligative 
properties has provided us with methods of molecular mass determinati on and has also contributed 
to the development of solution theory.
9.6.1 Why Some of the Properties are Called Colligat ive
 The reason for these properties to be called colligative can be explain ed by considering three 
solutions. Let us take 6 g of urea, 18 g of glucose and 34.2 g of sucrose and dissolve them separately 
in 1 kg of H20. 
Animation 9.17: COLLIGATIVE PROPERTIESOF SOLU-
TIONS
Source & Credit: web.mst
Animation 9.18: Why Some of the Properties are 
Called Colligative
Source & Credit: web.mst349.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
This  will produce 0.1 molal solution of each substance. Pure H2O has certain value of vapour 
pressure at a given temperature. In these three solutions, the vapour press ures will be lowered. 
The reason is that the molecules of a solute present upon the surface of a solution decrease the 
evaporating capability. Apparently, it seems that sucrose solution s hould show the maximum 
lowering of vapour pressure while urea should have the minimum low ering of vapour pressure. 
The reality is that the lowering of vapour pressure in all these solu tions will be same at a given 
temperature. Actually, the number of particles of the solute in all th e solutions are equal. We have 
added 1/10th of Avogadro’s number of particles (6.02 x 1022). The lowering of vapour pressure 
depends upon the number of solute particles and not upon their molar mass and structures. Well, 
it should be kept in mind that these three solutes are non-volatile and n on-electrolyte.
 The boiling points of these solutions are higher than that of pure s olvent. It is observed that 
the boiling point elevation of these three solutions is 0.052 oC. Similarly, freezing points will be 
depressed for these solutions and the value of depression in these three ca ses is 0.186°C. The 
reason again is that the elevation of boiling point and the depression of freezing point depend 
upon number of particles of solute.
 Now, let us deduce the values of elevation of the boiling point and the d epression of the 
freezing point of water for 1 molal solutions. For that purpose, try to dissolve 60 g of urea. 180 
g of glucose and 342 g of sugar separately in 1 kg of water. If, it is possible then the elevation of 
boiling point and depression of freezing point of water will be 0. 52 oC and 1.86 oC, respectively. All 
the three solutions will boil at 100.52 °C and freeze at -1.86 oC. These values of elevation of boiling 
point and depression of freezing point are called molal boiling p oint constants and molal freezing 
point constants of H2O denoted by Kb and Kf respectively.
 These are also named as ebullioscopic and cryoscopic constants , respectively. These constants 
depend upon the nature of solvent and not upon the nature of solute. Followi ng Table (9.3) give the 
values of Kb and Kf for some common solvents.
Solvent B.P.(0C) Kb(0C/m) F.P.(0C) Kf(0C/m)
H2O
Ether
Aceticacid
Ethanol
Benzene100
34.4
118
79
800.52
2.16
3.07
1.75
2.700
-116.3
17
-114.5
5.51.86
1.79
3.90
1.99
5.10Table (9.3) Kb and Kf values for some solvents359.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
To observe the colligative properties, following condition should be fuli lled by the solutions.
(i) Solution should be dilute
(ii) Solute should be non-volatile
(iii) Solute should be non-electrolyte.
 Now, let us  discuss these colligative properties one by one. (We wil l not discuss osmotic 
pressure over here).
9.6.2 Lowering of Vapour Pressure
 The particles can escape from all over the surface of a pure solven t Fig. (9.6a). When the 
solvent is containing dissolved non-volatile non-electrolyte solute particles , the escaping tendency 
of solvent particles from the surface of the solution decreases and its vapour pressure is lowered 
Fig (9.6 b)
 A quantitative relationship between the change of vapour pressure of a solvent due to addition 
of non-volatile and non-electrolyte solute and the mole fraction of solute ha s been given by Raoult.
 According to equation (3), Raoult says that relative lowering of vap our pressure isequal to the 
mole fraction of solute.
      2op=xp∆
Fig (9.6) Lowering of vapour pressure369.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 If n2 and n1 are the number of moles of a solute and solvent respectively, then
      2
2
12nx=n +n
  So,
    2
o
12pn=p n +n∆
 For a dilute solution, n2 can be ignored in denominator
Hence,     2
o
1pn=pn∆
 The number of moles of solute and solvent are obtained by dividing th eir masses in grams 
with their respective relative molecular masses. If W1 and W2 are the masses of solvent and solute 
while M1 and M2 are their relative molecular masses receptively, then
    1
1
1Wn=M and  2
2
2Wn=M
     2
2
o
1
1W
pM=Wp
M∆
  21
o
21pW M= x ............ (5)pMW∆
 
  o
21
2
1p WMM = x ............. (6)pW฀ 
 The molecular mass (M2) of a non-volatile solute 
can be calculated from the equation (6).
 Animation 9.19: Lowering of Vapour Pressure
Source & Credit: thunderscientiic379.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 Example 10:
 Pure benzene has a vapour pressure of 122.0 torr at 32°C. When 20g of a non- volatile  solute 
were dissolved in 300g of benzene, a vapour pressure of 120 torr wa s observed. Calculate the 
molecular mass of the solute. The molecular mass of benzene being 7 8.1.
Solution
Let the molecular mass of the solute be     = M2
Mass of solute dissolved (W2)       = 20 g
Vapour pressure of pure solvent (p°)     = 122.0 torr
Vapour pressure of solution (p)       = 120.0 torr
Lowering of vapour pressure ( ∆p)      = 122.0 - 120.0 = 2.0 torr
Mass of solvent (W1)         = 300 g
Molar mass of solvent (M1)        = 78.1
Formula applied    21
o
21pW M=xpMW∆
      o
21
2
1p WMM= xpW∆
  Putting the values
    -1
2122.0 20x78.1M = x =317.6 g mol  Answer2.0 300389.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.6.3 Elevation of Boiling Point
 The presence of a non-volatile non-electrolyte solute in the solution decreas es the vapour 
pressure of the solvent. Greater, the concentration of solute, greater will be the lowering of vapour 
pressure. Therefore, the temperature at which a solvent in the solution sta te boils is increased. 
In order to understand it, determine the vapour pressures of a solvent at various temperatures. 
Plot a graph between temperatures on x-axis and vapour pressures on y-axis. A rising curve is 
obtained with the increase of temperature. The slope of the curve at high temperature is greater, 
which shows that at high temperature the vapour pressure increases m ore rapidly. Temperature 
T1 on the curve AB which is for the pure 
solvent, corresponds to the boiling point 
of the solvent. The solvent boils when its 
vapour pressure becomes equal to the 
external pressure represented by p°.
 When the solute is added in the 
solvent and vapour pressures are 
plotted vs temperatures, then a curve 
CD is obtained. This curve is lower than 
the curve AB because vapour pressures 
of solution are less than those of pure 
solvent. Solution will boil at higher 
temperature T2 to equalize its pressure 
to p°. The diference of two boiling 
points gives the elevation of the boiling 
point ∆Tb. 
 The higher the  concentration of 
solute, the greater will be the lowering 
in vapour pressure of solution and hence higher will be its boili ng point. So, elevation of boiling 
point ∆Tb is directly proportional to the molality of solution.
    bbT  = K m          ................    (8)∆
Where Kb is called the ebullioscopic constant or molal boiling point consta nt.
Fig (9.7) Elevation of boiling temperature curve399.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 According to equation (8), molality of any solute determines the elevati on of boiling point of 
a solvent. You may dissolve 6 g of urea in 500 g of H2O or 18 g of glucose in 500 g of H2O both give 
0.2 molal solution and both have same elevation of boiling points i.e.  0.1 °C, which is l/5th of 0.52°C. 
We say that  ∆Tb (not T) is a colligative property. We know that
   Mass of solute 1Molality(m) = xMolar mass of solute Mass of solvent in k g
or   22
2 1 21W 1 1000 Wm =  = .......... (9)M W/1000 M W
Putting the value of m from equation (9) into equation (8 )
    2
bb
211000 WT  = K  ......... (10)MW∆
Animation 9.20: Elevation of Boiling Point
Source & Credit: gif2ly409.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 
 Rearranging equation (10)
 Molecular mass (M2) b2
b1KW=  x  x 1000               ............  (11)TW∆
 Equation (11) can be used  to determine the molar mass of a non-vol atile and nonelectrolyte 
solute in a volatile solvent.
9.6.4 Measurement of Boiling Point Elevation: Landsb erger’S Method
 This is one of the best methods for the measurement of boiling point eleva tion of a solution. 
The apparatus consists of four major parts.
(a) An inner tube with a hole in its side. This tube is gradu ated.
(b) A boiling lask which  sends the solvent vapours into the grad uated tube through a   
          rosehead.
(c) An outer tube, which receives hot solvent 
vapours coming from the side hole of the  
           inner tube.
(d) A thermometer which can read up to 
0.01K.
 The solvent is placed in the inner tube. 
Some solvent is also taken in a separate 
lask and its vapours are sent into this tube. 
These vapours cause the solvent in the tube 
to boil by its latent heat of condensation. This 
temperature is noted which is the boiling 
point of the pure solvent. 
 The supply of the vapours is temporarily 
cut of and a weighed  pellet of the solute is 
dropped in the inner tube. The vapours of the 
solvent are again passed through it until the 
solution is boiled. This temperature is again 
noted. Fig (9.8).Fig (9.8) Landsberger method for measurement of elevat ion
of boiling point419.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 Now, the supply of the solvent vapours is cut of. The  thermometer and the rosehead are 
removed and the volume of the solution is measured. The diference of the two boiling points gives 
the value of ∆Tb. The following formula is used to calculate the molecular mass of solute.    
          
Example 11:
 The boiling point of water is 99.725 °C. To a sample of 600g  of water are added 24.0 g of a 
solute having molecular mass of 58 g mol-1, to form a solution. Calculate the boiling point of the 
solution.
Solution
Boiling point of pure H2O    o=99.725 C
Mass of solvent (H2O) W1    =600 g
Mass of solute (W2)     =24.00 g
Molar mass of solute (M2)    -1=58 g mol
The molal boiling point constant of H2O (Kb) o=0.52 C
Formula
   2
bb
121000 WT  = K x W x M∆
   o 0.52 x 1000 x 24.00= = 0.358 C600 x 58
 Boiling point of solution = boilingpoint of pure solvent + elevation of boiling point
   o=99.725 + 0.358 =100.083 C  Answerb2
2
b1K 1000 WM  =  ............ (11)TW∆429.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.6.5 Depression of the Freezing Point of a Solvent  by a Solute
 The freezing point of a substance is the temperature at which the sol id and liquid phases of 
the substance co-exist. Freezing point is also deined as that temperature at which its solid  and 
liquid phases have the same vapour pressures.  When a non-volatile solute is added to a solvent, 
its vapour pressure is decreased. At the freezing point, there are two th ings in the vessel i.e. liquid 
solution and the solid solvent. The solution will freeze at that temperatur e at which the vapour 
pressures of both liquid solution and solid solvent are same. It mea ns that a solution should freeze 
at lower temperature than pure solvent.
 In  order to understand it, plot a graph between vapour pressure temp erature for pure sol -
vent and that of solution. The curve ABC is for the pure solvent. The sol vent freezes at temperature 
T1 corresponding to the point B when the vapour pressure of freezing solven t is p°. The portion of 
the curve BC is for the solid solvent. This portion has a greater slop , showing that the change of 
vapour pressure with the change of temperature is more rapid Fig (9 .9).
Fig (9.9) Depression of freezing point curve439.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The  curve  DEC for the solution will meet the curve BC at the point E. This is the freezing point 
of solution T2, and corresponds to the vapour pressure p which is lower than p° . The reason is that 
vapour pressure of solution is less than the pure solvent. 
 Depression of freezing point = freezing point of pure solvent - freezin g point of solution.
 So,      f 12T =T-T∆
 This depression in freezing point ∆Tf is related to the molality (m) of the solution. The  rela -
tionship is similar to that of elevation of the boiling point.
Animation 9.21: Depression of the Freezing Point of  a Solvent by a Solute
Source & Credit: cod449.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 
     fTm∆∝
     ffT =K m                .............      (12)∆
 Kf is called the molal freezing point constant or the cryoscopic consta nt and m is the molality 
of  the solution. To get the inal expression, let us put the following ex pression (9) of molality into 
the equation (12) i.e.
     2
211000 Wm = ......... (9)M xW
  We get  2
ff
211000 WT  =K  .................. (13)M xW∆
 Where W2= mass of solute and M2= molar mass of the solute, W1= mass of solvent  in kg Re -
arranging equation (13)
     f2
2
f1K 1000 WMolar mass of solute (M )=  ......... (14)TW∆
9.6.6 Measurement of Freezing Point Depression Beckm ann’s Freezing Point 
Apparatus:
 There are many methods but Beckmann’s method is easy to perform The apparatus consists 
of three major parts. Fig.(9.10).
a.  A freezing tube with a side arm. It contains solvent or solution  and is itted with a stirrer and 
a Beckmann’s thermometer.
b.  An outer larger tube into which the freezing tube is adjusted. The  air jacket in between these 
tubes help to achieve a slower and more uniform rate of cooling.
c.  A large jar containing a freezing mixture. Around 20 to 2 5g of the solvent is taken in the freez -
ing tube. The bulb of the thermometer, is immersed in the solvent. Firs t of all, approximate freezing 
point of the solvent is measured by directly cooling the freezing point tube in the freezing mixture.459.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The freezing tube is then put in the air jacket and cooled slowly.  In this way, accurate freezing 
point of the solvent is determined. Now, the solvent is re-melted by removing the tube from the 
bath and weighed amount of 0.2 to 0.3 g of the solute is introduced in the side tube.
 The freezing point of the solution is determined while stirring the s olution. The diference 
of the two freezing points gives the value of ∆Tf and the following formula is used to calculate the 
molar mass of solute.
    f2
2
f1K 1000 WM =  ......... (14)TW∆
Example 12:
 The freezing point of pure camphor is 178.4°C. Find the freezi ng point of a solution containing 
2.0 g of a non-volatile compound, having molecular mass 140, in 40g of camphor. The molal freezing 
point constant of camphor is 37.7 °C kg mol-1.
Fig (9.10) Beckmann's freezing point apparatus469.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Solution:
Freezing point of camphor    = 178.4 °C
Mass of solute (W2)      =2.00g
Mass of solvent (W1)      = 40 g
Molar mass of solute (M2)    = 140
Molal freezing point constant of solvent  = 37.7° C kg mol-1.
Freezing point of solution     = ?
Applying the equation
     2
ff
121000 WT  =K  W x M∆
 We have to calculate, the freezing point of solution, so irst we get the d epression in  freezig 
point ∆Tf then subtract it from freezing point of pure solvent.
     o
f37.7 x 1000 x 2T = =13.46 C40 x 140∆
Freezing point of solution o=178.4 - 13.4 = 164.94 C  Answer
9.6.7 Applications of Boiling Point Elevation and F reezing  Point Depression 
Phenomena
 Apart from the molecular mass determination, the presence of a solute increases the liquid 
range of the solution both by raising the boiling point and lowerin g the freezing point. The most 
important application of this phenomenon is the use of an antifreeze i n the radiator of an’automo -
bile. The solute is ethylene glycol, which is not only completely mi scible with water but has a very 
low vapour pressure and non-volatile in character. When mixed with  water, it lowers the freezing 
point as well as raises the boiling point. 
 During winter it protects a car by preventing the liquid in the ra diator from freezing, as wa -
ter alone, if it were used instead. In hot summer, the antifreeze soluti on also protects the radiator 
from boiling over.479.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 Another, common  application is the use of NaCl or KNO3 to lower the melting point of ice. 
One can prepare a freezing mixture for use in an ice cream mac hine.
9.7.0 ENERGETICS OF SOLUTION
 In a solution, the distances between solute and solvent molecules or ions  increase somewhat 
as compared with their pure states. This increase in the distance of solvent molecules requires 
energy to overcome the cohesive intermolecular forces. Hence, it is an endoth ermic process. Sim -
ilarly, the separation of solute molecules also needs energy so it is also an endothermic process. 
The intermixing of solute with solvent molecules is to establish new in termolecular forces between 
unlike molecules. It releases energy and thus is an exothermic phen omenon. The strengths of the 
two type of forces will decide whether the process of dissolution will be endothermic or exother -
mic.
Animation 9.22: Applications of Boiling Point Eleva tion and Freezing Point Depression 
Phenom ena
Source & Credit: lifestyle489.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 Thus, the process of dissolution occurs with either an absorption or release of energy. This is 
due to breakage and re-establishment of intermolecular forces of attrac tion between solute and 
solvent molecules.
 When potassium nitrate is dissolved in water, the temperature of the sol ution decreases. It 
shows it to be an endothermic process. The solution of lithium chlori de in water produces heat, 
showing that the process of dissolution is exothermic. The quantity of heat energy, that is absorbed 
or released when a substance forms solution, is termed as heat of sol ution.
 So, the enthalpy or heat of solution of a substance is deined as the h eat change when one 
mole of the substance is dissolved in a speciied number of moles of solvent at a given tempera -
ture. It is given the symbol  soluH∆ . The soluH∆  gives the diference between the energy possessed by 
the solution after its formation and the original energy of the components  before their mixing i.e.
      solu solution componentsH =H -H∆
 Here, soluH∆  is the  energy content of solution after its formation, while componentsH  represents the 
energy contents of components before their mixing. However, both these factors  can not actually 
be measured, only their diference i.e. the change soluH∆  is practically measurable. If the value of 
soluH∆ is negative, it would mean that the solution is having less energy tha n the components from 
which it was made, hence the dissolution process is an exothermic one. On the other hand, an 
endothermic process would have a positive soluH∆  value. In Table (9.4) are given values of heats of 
solution of diferent ionic solids in water at ininite dilution.
Table (9.4) Heats of solution
of some ionic solids
Sub-
stanceHeats of
solution (kJ mol-
1)
NaCl
NH4NO3
KCl
KI
NH4Cl
LiCl
Li2CO34.98
26.0
17.8
21.4
16.2
-35.0
-12.8499.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The magnitude  of heat of solution gives information regarding the s trength of intermolecular 
forces of attraction between components which mix to form a solution.
 When one mole of sodium chloride (58.5g) is dissolved in 10 mol es of water (180g), then 2.008 
kJ of energy is absorbed.
  
    22 NaCl+10H O NaCl (10H O)   H=+2.008kJ. →∆
9.7.1 Hydration Energy of Ions
 When an ionic compound, say potassium iodide is dissolved in water, the irst step, is the 
separation of K+ and I ions from solid. In the second step, these separated ions ar e surrounded by 
solvent molecules. The irst step breaks the lattice to separate the ions.
Animation 9.23: ENERGETICS OF SOLUTION
Source & Credit: ntu509.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Since, energy is required to accomplish this step, so this step is  endothermic. The amount of en -
ergy needed to separate a crystalline compound into isolated ions (or a toms) is known as lattice 
energy. The lattice energy of ionic solids is always higher than  molecular solids.
 In  the second step, the ions are brought into water and get hydrated (solvated) Fig (9.11). A 
hydrated ion is attracted by the solvent dipoles and energy is released , so this step is exothermic. 
The energy given out by this step is known as the hydration energy ( or solvation energy).
    +- + -
2 K  + I  + xH O K (aq)+I (aq) →
 The inal equation will be as follows:
    +-
2 Kl(s) + xH O K (aq) + I (aq) →Table (9.5) Hydration energies
of common ions
Ion ∆H0
(ion mole-1)
H+
Li+
Na+
Ag+
K+
Mg2+
Cu2+
NH4+
F-
Cl-
Br-
OH--1075
-499
-390
-464
-305
-1891
-1562
-281
-457
-384
-351
-460519.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The  values of hydration energies of individual ions, i.e. cation s and anions are given in Table 
(9.5). It is interesting to compare these values with the ionic radii  of the ions. Greater the size of 
monovalent cation, lesser is the heat of hydration. Divalent and trivalent cations have higher values 
due to high charge densities. Anions also show a deinite trend of h eat of hydration, depending 
upon their sizes.
 On diluting  a concentrated solution, there is a further heat chan ge. This heat change de -
pends on the amount of water used for dilution. The heat of dilution g radually decreases, so that 
eventually increasing the dilution produces no further heat change. This occurs when there are 
800-1000 moles of water to one mole of solute. This stage is called i ninite dilution and the heat of 
solution is expressed as:
  -1
2 soln NaCl(s) + H O NaCl(aq) Na (aq) Cl (aq) H = + 4.9 8kJ mol+−→ +∆ ฀
Fig (9.11) Interaction  between water molecules and cations and anions provide the energy- necessary
to overcome both the intermolecular forces between wate r molecules and the ionic bond in a potassium 
iodide529.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
9.8  HYDRATION AND HYDROL YSIS
9.8.1 Hydration
When ionic compounds are dissolved in water, they are dissociated i nto ions. Negative ions are 
surrounded by water molecules. The partial positively charged hyd rogen atoms of water surround 
and attract the anions with electrostatic forces of attraction. Similar ly positive ions of solute create 
attractions with partial negative oxygen atoms of water molecules. In th is way, all the ions in the 
aqueous solution are hydrated.
 The process in which water molecules surround and interact with  solute ions or molecules is 
called hydration.
Animation 9.24: Hydration Energy of Ions
Source & Credit: arizona539.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The ions, which are surrounded by water molecules, are called hydrated ions. The number of 
water molecules, which surround a given ion depends upon the size of the ions and the magnitude 
of its charge (charge/area). If the size of the ion is small an d is highly charged positive ion, it has 
high charge density. Hence, greater number of water molecules will  surround it.
Animation 9.25: HYDRATION AND HYDROLYSIS
Source & Credit: i-biology.net549.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Negatively charged ions have low charge density, and have smaller number of water molecules
surrounding them. Hence, the ion with high charge density has a  greater ability to attract polar 
water molecules than ions with smaller charge density.
9.8.2 Hydrates
 The crystalline substances, which contain chemically combin ed water in deinite proportions is 
called a hydrate. Hydrates are mostly, produced when aque -
ous solution of soluble salt is evaporated. The formation of 
hydrates is not limited to salts but is common with acids, 
bases and elements. The water molecules are attached with 
cations in the hydrates. Anyhow, in CuSO4 .5H20, four water 
molecules, are attached with Cu2+ and one with SO42-. The 
reason is that Cu2+ has a greater charge density. The size of 
Cu2+ is much smaller than SO42-, which has same amount of 
charge.
Animation 9.26: Hydration
Source & Credit: rebloggy
Animation 9.27: Hydrates
Source & Credit: wikipedia559.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Water of Crystallization
Those water molecules, which combine with substances as they are c rystallized from aqueous 
solutions, are called water of crystallization or water of hydration . Some familiar examples are as 
follows:  22(COOH) .2H O  (oxalic acid), 22BaCl .2H O , 23 2Na CO .10H O  , 22MgCl .6H O , 247 2Na B O .10H O  (borax), 
42CaSO .2H O  (gypsum), 42MgSO .7H O  (epsom salt) and 32AlCl .6H O .
9.8.3 Hydrolysis
 When NaCl is  dissolved in water, the resulting solution is neutr al i.e. the concentration of 
each of H+ and OH- ions are equal to 10-7 M, as in pure water. But this balance between H+ and OH- 
ions can be disturbed with resulting change in the pH of solution  when other salts are dissolved in 
water. 
 It is  commonly, observed that diferent salts, upon dissolving in water, do not always form 
neutral solutions. For example, 4NH Cl , 3AlCl , 4CuSO  give acidic solutions in water. On the other hand, 
23Na CO  and 3CH COONa  form basic solutions in water. These interactions between salts and  water are 
called hydrolytic reactions and the phenomenon is known as hydrol ysis.It involves the reactions 
of the ions of diferent salts to give acidic or basic solutions. It i s the decomposition of compounds 
with water, in which water itself is decomposed.
 The hydrolysis of the salts mentioned above are shown as follows:
    +-
42 4NH Cl + H O NH OH + H  + Cl ฀
    +-
32 3AlCl  + 3H O Al(OH)  + 3H  + 3Cl ฀
    + 2-
42 2 4 CuSO  + 2H O Cu(OH)  + 2H  + SO ฀
 These hydrolytic reactions, produce weak bases 3Al(OH) , 4NH OH  and 2Cu(OH) . But, Cl- and SO42- 
are weak conjugate bases of HCl and H2SO4. They are not hydrolysed in water. H+ ions remain free 
in solution and so their solution are acidic in character. 
 The Ka values of HCl and H2SO4 are very high  as compared to Kb values of 3Al(OH) , 4NH OH  and 
2Cu(OH) . For 3CH COONa  the reaction with water is
    
    +-
3 23CH COONa + H O CH COOH + Na  + OH ฀569.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
 The  acetate ion is hydrolyzed in water to give CH3COOH and OH- becomes free. +Na is not 
hydrolysed. 
The  result is that the solution becomes basic in nature. .Similar ly, 34Na PO , 34Na AsO  etc give basic 
solutions in water due to the formation of a Na+ ,OH- and weak acids 34Na PO  and 34H AsO , which are 
least dissociated. The dissolution of KCl, Na2SO4, KBr, etc in water give neutral solutions. Because 
these salts are not hydrolysed in water. Their positive ions K+, Na+ are not hydrolysed by water. 
Similarly, their negative ions Cl-, Br-, SO42- are also not hydrolysed. It means that the salts of strong 
bases and strong acids are not hydrolysed by water.
 Anyhow, the  salts derived from weak acids and weak bases may  not give neutral solutions. It 
depends upon the pKa and pKb values of acid and base produced.
Animation 9.28: Hydrolysis
Source & Credit: i-biology.net579.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1. A solution, on average, is a homogeneous mixture of two or more kind s of diferent molecular or 
ionic substances. The substance, which is present in a large quantity is called a solvent and the 
other in small quantity is, called a solute.
2. Solutions containing relatively lower concentrations of solute are ca lled dilute solutions, where -
as those containing relatively higher concentrations of solutes are cal led concentrated solutions. 
Solubility is the concentration of a solute in a solution, when the sol ution is at equilibrium with 
the solute at a particular temperature.
3. The concentration of a solution may be expressed in a number of ways. i) percentage composi -
tion, ii) molarity, iii) molality, iv) mole fraction, v) parts p er million.
4. Solutions may be ideal or non-ideal. Those solutions, which ob ey Raoult’s law are ideal solutions. 
Raoult’s law tells us that the lowering of vapour pressure of a solven t by a solute, at a constant 
temperature, is directly proportional to the concentration of solute.
5. Many solutions  do not behave ideally, as they show deviations fr om Raoult’s law. A solution may 
show positive or negative deviation from Raoult’s law. Such liquid m ixtures, which distill without 
change in composition, are called azeotropic mixtures.
6. Colligative properties of a solution are those properties, which depen d on the number of solute 
and solvent molecules or ions and are independent of the nature of solute.  Lowering of vapour 
pressure, elevation of boiling point and depression of freezing point and osmotic pressure are 
the important colligative properties of solutions.
7. Elevation of boiling point of a solvent in one molal solution is ca lled molal boiling point constant 
or ebullioscopic constant. Depression of freezing point of a solvent in one molal solution is 
called molal freezing point constant or cryoscopic constant.
8. The enthalpy or heat of solution of a substance is the heat chang e when one mole of the sub -
stance is dissolved in a speciied number of moles of solvent at a gi ven temperature.
9.  The process in which water molecules surround and interact with solute ions or molecules is 
called hydration. The crystalline substances, which contain m olecules of water in their crystal 
lattices, are called hydrates. They are mostly produced, when aqu eous solutions of soluble alts 
are evaporated.
10. Salts of weak acids with strong bases react with water to prod uce basic solutions, whereas salts 
of weak bases with strong acids react to give acidic solutions. Su ch reactions are called hydro -
lytic reactions, and the salts are said to be hydrolysed. Salts of  strong acids and strong bases do 
not hydrolyse and give neutral solution.589.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q 1.  Choose the correct answer for the given ones.
i)   Molarity of pure water is
(a) 1    (b) 18    (c) 55.5   (d) 6
ii)   18 g glucose is dissolved in 90 g of water. The relative l owering of vapour pressure is equal to
(a) 1/5   (b) 5.1   (c) 1/51   (d) 6
iii)  A solution of glucose is 10% w/v. The volume in which 1 g mole of it is dissolved will be
(a) 1dm3   (b) 1.8dm3   (c) 200cm3   (d) 900cm3
iv)  An aqueous solution of ethanol in water may have vapour pressur e
(a)  equal to that of water   (b)  equal to that of ethanol
(c)  more than that of water   (d)  less than that of water
v)   An azeotropic mixture of two liquids boils at a lower temperatur e than either of them when:
(a)  it is saturated
(b)  it shows positive deviation from Raoult’s law
(c)  it shows negative deviation from Raoult’s law
(d)  it is metastabl
(vi) In  azeotropic mixture showing positive deviation from Raoult’s l aw, the volume of the mixture 
is
(a)  slightly more than the total volume of the components
(b)  slightly less than the total volume of the components
(c)  equal to the total volume of the components
(d)  none of these
(vii)  Which of the following solutions has the highest boiling’p oint?
(a)  5.85 % solution of sodium chloride   (b)  18.0 % solu tion of glucose
(c)  6.0 % solution of urea     (d)  All have the same boiling  point
(viii)  Two solutions of NaCl and KCl are prepared separately b y dissolving same amount of the sol -
ute in water. Which of the following statements is true for these solution s?
(a)  KCl solution will have higher boiling point than NaCl sol ution
(b)  Both the solutions have diferent boiling points
(c)  KCl and NaCl solutions possess same vapour pressure
(d)  KCl solution possesses lower freezing point than NaCl solution599.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
(ix)  The molal boiling point constant is the ratio of the elevation in  boiling point to
(a)  molarity     (b)  molality
(c)  mole fraction of solvent  (d)  mole fraction of solute
(x)  Colligative properties are the properties of
(a)  dilute solutions which behave as nearly ideal solutions
(b)  concentrated solutions which behave as nearly non-ideal soluti ons
(c)  both (i) and (ii)
d)   neither (i) nor (ii)
Q 2.  Fill in the blanks with suitable words
(i)   Number of molecules of sugar in 1 dm3 of 1M sugar solution is______ .
(ii)  100g of a 10% aqueous solution of NaOH contains 10g of NaOH in______ g of water.
(iii)  When an azeotropic mixture is distilled, its ______  remains constant.
(iv)  The molal freezing point constant is also known as_______ _____ constant.
(v)  The  boiling point of an azeotropic solution of two liquids is  lower than either of them because 
the solution shows___________ from Raoult’s law.
(vi)  Among equimolal aqueous solutions of NaCl, BaCl2 and FeCl3, the maximum depression in 
freezing point is shown by____________solution.
(vii)  A solution of ethanol in water shows_________ deviations a nd gives azeotropic solution with________
boiling point than other components.
(viii)  Colligative properties are used to calculate____________ of  a compound.
(ix)  The hydration energy of Br- ion is__________ than that of F- ion.
(x)  The acqueous solution of NH4Cl is______ while that of Na2SO4 is_____.
Q 3.  Indicate True or False from the given statements
(i)  At a deinite temperature the amount of a solute in a given saturated  solution is ixed.
(ii) Polar solvents readily dissolve non-polar covalent compounds.
(iii) The solubility of a substance decreases with increase in temperature, if the heat of a solution 
is negative.
(iv) The rate of evaporation of a liquid is inversely proportional to th e intermolecular forces of at -
traction.
(v) The molecular mass of an electrolyte determined by lowering of vap our pressure is less than 
the theoretical molecular mass.
(vi) Boiling point elevation is directly proportional to the molality of the solution and inversely pro -
portional to boiling point of solvent.609.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
(vii)  All solutions containing 1g of non-volatile non-electrolyte solu tes in some solvent will have 
the same freezing point.
(viii)  The freezing point of a 0.05 molal solution of a non-volati le non-electrolyte in water is -0.93 0C.
(ix)  Hydration and hydrolysis are diferent process for Na2SO4.
(x)  The hydration energy of an ion only depends upon its charg e.
Q4.  Deine and explain the followings with one example in each ca se.
(a)  A homogeneous phase   (f)  Zeotropic solutions
(b)  A concentrated solution   (g)  Heat of hydration
(c)  A solution of solid in a solid  (h)  Water of crystalliz ation
(d)  A consulate temperature   (i)  Azeotropic solution
(e)  A non-ideal solution    (j)  Conjugate solution
Q5.  (a)  What are the concentration units of solutions. Compare mol ar and molal solutions
  (b)  One has one molal solution of NaCl and one molal solution  of glucose.
(i) Which solution has greater number of particles of solute?
(ii) Which solution has greater amount of the solvent?
(iii) How do we convert these concentrations into weight by weight percenta ge?
Q6.  Explain the following with reasons
(i)  The concentration in terms of molality is independent of temperatu re but molarity depends 
upon temperature.
(ii) The sum of mole fractions of all the components is always eq ual to unity for any solution.
iii) 100 g of 98 % H2SO4 has a volume of 54.34 cm3 of H2SO4 .(Density = 1.84 g cm-3)
iv) Relative lowering of vapour pressure is independent of the temperature.
v)  Colligative properties are obeyed when the solute is non-electrolyte, and  also when the solu -
tions are dilute.
vi) The total volume of the solution by mixing 100 cm3 of water with 100 cm’3of alcohol may not be 
equal to 200 cm3. Justify it.
vii) One molal solution  of urea, in water is dilute as compared to one molar solution of urea, but 
the number of particles of the solute is same. Justify it.
viii) Non-ideal solutions do not obey the Raoult’s law.619.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Q7.  What are non ideal solutions? Discuss their types and give th ree example of each.
Q8.(a) Explain fractional distillation. Justify the two curves when composition is plotted against 
boiling point of solutions.
(b) The solutions showing positive and negative deviations cannot be fr actionally distilled at their 
speciic compositions. Explain it.
Q9(a) What are azeotropic mixtures? Explain them with the help of graphs?
 (b) Explain the efect of temperature on phenol-water system.
Q10.(a) What are colligative properties? Why are they called so?
 (b) What is the physical signiicance of Kb and Kf values of solvents?
Q 11. How do you explain that the lowering of vapour pressure is a  colligative property? How do we 
measure the molar mass of a non volatile, non- electrolyte solute in a vol atile solvent?
Q12. How do you justify that
(a)  boiling points of the solvents increase due to the presence of solu tes.
(b)  freezing points are depressed due to the presence of solutes.
(c)  the boiling point of one molal urea solution is 100.52 °C b ut the boiling point of two molal 
urea solution is less than 101.040C.
(d)  Beckmann’s thermometer is used to note the depression in freezing point.
(e)  in summer the antifreeze solutions protect the liquid of the radia tor from boiling over.
(f)   NaCl and KNO3 are used to lower the melting point of ice.
Q13. What is Raoult’s law. Give its three statements. How this law c an help us to understand the 
ideality of a solution.
Q 14. Give graphical explanation for elevation of boiling point of a  solution. Describe one method 
to determine the boiling point elevation of a solution.
Q 15. Freezing points of solutions are depressed when non-volatile sol utes are present in volatile 
solvents. Justify it. Plot a graph to elaborate your answer. Also, g ive one method to record the 
depression of freezing point of a solution.629.SOLUTIONS eLearn.Punjab
Q16. Discuss the energetics of solution. Justify the heats of solutions  as exothermic and endother -
mic properties.
Q17.(a) Calculate the molarity of glucose solution when 9 g of it are dissolved in 250 cm3 of solution. 
(Ans: 0.2 mol dm-3)
(b)  Calculate the mass of urea in 100 g of H2O in 0.3 molal solution. 
(Ans: 1.8g)
(c) Calculate the concentration of a solution in terms of molality, w hich is obtained by mixing 250 g 
of 20% solution of NaCl with 200 g of 40 % solution of NaCl.
(Ans: 6.94m)
Q18.(a) An aqueous solution of sucrose has been labeled as 1 mol al. Find the mole fraction of the 
solute and the solvent. 
(Ans: 0.0176, 0.9823)
(b) You are provided with 80% H2SO4 w/w having density 1.8 g cm-3 . How much volume of this H2SO4 
sample is required to obtain one dm3 o f 20% w/w H2SO4, which has a density o f 1.25 g cm-3.
(Ans: 173.5cm1)
Q19. 250  cm3 of 0.2 molar K2SO4 solution is mixed with 250 cm3 of 0.2 molar KCl solution. Calculate 
the molar concentration of K+ ions in the solution. 
(Ans: 0.3 molar)
Q 20. 5g  of NaCl are dissolved in 1000 g of water. The densi ty of resulting solution is 0.997 g/cm3. 
Calculate molality, molarity and mole fraction of this solution. A ssume that the vol ume of the 
solution is equal to that of solvent.
(Ans: M = 0.08542, m = 0.0854, Mole fraction of NaCl= 0. 00154, Mole fraction of H2O =0.9984.)
Q 21. 4.675g of a compound with empirical formula C3H3O were dissolved in 212.5 g of pure ben -
zene. The freezing point of solution, was found 1.020C less than that of pure benzene. The molal 
freezing point constant of benzene is 5.10C. Calculate (i) the relative molar mass and (ii) the mo -
lecular formula of the compound.
(Ans:110gmol-1, C6H6O2)
Q 22. The boiling point of a solution containing 0.2 g of a su bstance A in 20.0 g of ether (molar mass 
= 74) is 0.17 K higher than that of pure ether. Calculate the m olar mass of A. Molal boiling point 
constant of ether is 2.16 K. 
(Ans: 127gmol-1)
Q 23. 3 g of a non-volatile, non-electrolyte solute ‘X’ are dissolved in 50 g of ether (molar mass = 74) 
at 293 K. The vapour pressure of ether falls from 442 torr to 426 torr under these conditions. 
Calculate the molar mass of solute ‘X’. 
(Ans: 122.6 g mol-1)