CHAPTER
6     CHEMICAL BONDING
Animation 6.1: Chemical Bonding
Source & Credit:  chemistry.elmhurst26 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.1.0 INTRODUCTION
 A chemical bond is the force, which holds together two or more atoms or  ions to form a large 
variety of compounds. The forces which are responsible for such bonding and the shapes of the 
molecules formed are as a result of chemical combination. 
The theory of chemical bonding has been a major problem of modern  chemistry. In this chapter, 
we shall look into the nature of the chemical bonds formed between th e atoms.
Simulation 6.1: Chemical Bond
Source & Credit : pbslearningmedia
Animation 6.2: Chemical Bond
Source & Credit : geo.arizona36 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.1.1 Cause of Chemical Combination
 
           It has been observed that the chemical reactivities of el ements, depend upon their characteristic 
electronic conigurations. The noble gases with electronic coniguration  of valence shell Is2 (He) 
or ns2 np6 (Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, etc.) show little tendency to react chemically. There are just only a few 
stable compounds, formed by these elements like XeF2, XeF4, XeOF2, XeO3, etc. A noble gas does 
not react with another noble gas. Thus, these gases are the most stabl e of all the elements. Let us, 
see why noble gases are most stable. This can be explained on th e basis of their special electronic 
coniguration. Their outermost s and p orbitals are completely illed.
   ↿⇂     ↿⇂   ↿⇂   ↿⇂   ↿⇂   ↿⇂   ↿⇂ 
     2He = Is  10Ne = Is 2s 2px  2py  2py 2pz
 
All other elements, combine with one another, due to an inherent tendency  to stabilize themselves. 
They get their stabilization by losing, gaining or sharing elec trons to attain the nearest noble gas 
coniguration. The tendency of atoms to attain a maximum of eight electr ons in the valence shell is 
known as the ‘octet rule’. A few examples are given in Table (6 .1).
 In certain cases, both tendencies i.e. to lose or gain electrons have b een observed. But the 
system will go by the conditions in which the chemical combina tion takes place. For example, in 
the chemical combination between sodium and hydrogen to form NaH, hydrogen atom gains an 
electron. In the formation of HF the hydrogen atom donates the major shar e of its electron to 
luorine atom. 
 Any how, the ‘octet’ rule could not be made universal as the formati on of compounds PF5, SF6, 
BCl3 are not according to this rule.46 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.1.2 ENERGETICS OF BOND FORMATION
 According to the modern theory of chemical bonding, atoms form b onds as it leads to a 
decrease in energy. For example, when two hydrogen atoms approach each other, forces of 
attraction and repulsion operate simultaneously. 
Animation 6.3: bonding
Source & Credit : dynamicscience
Element TendencyElectronic coniguration Nearest
Befor electron loss or gain After electron loss or gain nobel gas
3Li Electron loss 1s2  2s11s2He (2)
12Mg Electron loss 1s2  2s2  2p6  3s21s2   2s2   2p6Ne (10)
9F Electron gain 1s2  2s2  2px2  2py2  2pz11s2   2s2   2p6Ne (10)
16S Electron gain 1s2  2s2  2p6  3s2  3px2  3py1 3pz11s2  2s2  2p6  3s2  3p6Ar (18)Table (6.1) Change in the electronic conigurations o f 
some elements after losing or gaining electrons56 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The attractive forces tend to bring the two atoms close to each other and the potential energy 
of the system is decreased. On the other hand, the repulsive forces tend to push the atoms apart 
and potential energy of the system is increased. It has been found th at the magnitude of potential 
energy for attractive forces is more than for repulsive forces. Therefore,  potential energy decreases 
as the two hydrogen atoms approach each other Fig(6.1).
Eventually, a state corresponding to the distance of 75.4pm is reach ed, where the attractive 
forces dominate the repulsive forces. Here,the potential energy of the system  is minimum and 
the hydrogen atoms are said to be bonded to form a stable molecule. So, this distance of 75.4 pm 
is called bond distance or bond length or compromise distance of tw o hydrogen atoms. When 
the atoms approach the distance of minimum energy, then the system of two hydrogen atoms is 
stabilized to maximum extent. The amount of energy evolved is 436.45k. Jmol-1 and is called bond 
formation energy. In order to break the bond, the same amount of energy has to be provided. Fig: (6.1) Potential energy curve for the formation of H2 molecule.66 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 
 For the case, where repulsive forces are dominant than the attractive forces, the energy of 
the system increases and it leads to instability. Consequently, a  bond is not formed. In order to 
understand bonding, the relative sizes of atoms should be known.
6.2. ATOMIC SIZES
ATOMIC RADII, IONIC RADII AND COVALENT RADII.
 The size of an atom is very important because many physical an d chemical properties are 
related to it. Atoms are assumed to be spherical. That is why, w e report the various types of radii 
to guess their sizes For this reason, the sizes of atoms are express ed in terms of atomic radii, ionic 
radii and covalent radii, etc,. depending upon the type of the comp ound used for its measurement.
Animation 6.4: ENERGETICS OF BOND FORMATION
Source & Credit : 800mainstreet76 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
       The atomic radius means the average distance between the nucl eus of the atom and its 
outermost electronic shell.
 The radius of an atom cannot be determined precisely due to the foll owing reasons.
(i) There is no sharp boundary of an atom. The probability of inding an electron never becomes 
exactly zero even at large distances from the nucleus.
(ii) The  electronic probability distribution is afected by neig hbouring atoms. For this reason,the 
size of an atom may change from one compound to another. 
 Atomic  radii can be determined, by measuring the distances b etween the centres of adjacent 
atoms with the help of X-rays or by spectroscopic measurements. Atom ic radii of elements of the 
periodic table in pm are shown in Table (6.2).
Animation 6.5: ATOMIC SIZES
Source & Credit : sustainable-nano86 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Variation of Atomic Radii in the Periodic Table
 In general, the atomic radii decrease from left to the right in a p eriod and increase from top 
to bottom in a group of the periodic table. The decreasing trend in  a period is due to the increase 
in the nuclear charge. As the nuclear charge increases, the p ull on the electrons is increased and 
size of an atom decreases. Moreover, the shielding efect remains the sam e from left to right in a 
period.
The increase in atomic radii in a group is due to increase i n the number of shells and the screening 
efect. The decrease of atomic radii is very prominent in second period , but less in higher periods. 
Moreover, the decrease is small, when we travel from left to right in tra nsition elements Sc(21) 
-Zn(30), Y(39) -Cd(48) due to the intervening electrons. The screen ing efect is also called shielding 
efect. This is responsible for the decrease in force of attraction of th e nucleus for the electrons 
present in the valence shell.
Animation 6.6: Periodic trends
Source & Credit : kaiserscience.wordpress96 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.2.1 Ionic Radii and Covalent Radii  
Ionic Radic
 The ionic radius of an ion is the radius of the ion while c onsidering it to be spherical in shape.  
The ionic radii of some ions in pm are given in Table (6.2).  The ionic radius of a cation is smaller than 
the atomic radius of the element from which it is derived. The ionic radius of an anion is greater 
than the atomic radius of the corresponding atom. The radius of N a atom, for example, reduces 
from 186 pm to 95 pm after conversion into Na+ ion. The ionic radius of Cl- ion increases from 99 pm 
to 181 pm. The cationic radius decreases with the increase in the efective nuclear charge on the 
ion. The decrease in radius is larger for divalent ions (Mg2+) and still larger for trivalent ions (Al3+). 
This is due to the reason that with the successive loss of electrons, th e nuclear charge attracts the 
remaining electrons with a greater force. 
The increase in the size of the anion is due to the increase in the electron-elenctron repulsion be -
cause of the increase in the valence shell electrons. Greater the amount of  negative charge on an 
atom, greater the size of ion.Table (6.2) Radii of atoms and ions in the periodic  table.106 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The variation of ionic radii in groups and periods have the sam e trend as for atomic radii. But 
keep in mind that ionic radius for metals is for positive ions an d for elements of group number VA 
to V iiA are for negative ions.
 Let us consider, the positive and negative ions, which are held together  by electrostatic 
forces of attraction in a crystal lattice. Fig. (6.2), r+ and r- are the values of radii of cation and anion, 
respectively.
 The interionic distance ‘R’ in a crystal lattice is equal to th e sum of the cationic radius r+ and 
the anionic radius r.
      R =  r+  + r-
 Pauling was able to determine the distance between K+ and Cl- ions in potassium chloride 
crystal and found that it was equal to the sum of the radii of the two ions.
      R = 133pm + 181 pm = 314 pm
 Thus, the ionic radius appeared to be an additive property. Pau ling extended this concept to 
other K+ salts and calculated the radii of other ions from the relationshi p:
       r- =  R  -  r+
Similarly, the ionic radii of diferent cations can also be determ ined.
Covalent Radii
 The covalent radius of an element is deined as half of the single b ond length between two 
similar atoms covalently bonded in a molecule.
F. ig (6.2) The relationaship of interionic 
distance R and ionic. radii (r+ and r- )
Animation 6.7: Ionic Radii and Covalent Radii Ionic  Radii
Source & Credit : chemwiki.ucdavis116 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The  covalent radius of hydrogen, for example, is 37.7 pm. It is half of the single bond length 
(75.4 pm) between the two H atoms in H-H molecule, as shown in Fi g (6.3).
The covalent radius of an atom can be used  to determine the covalent ra dius of another atom. For 
example, the experimentally determined bond length of C-Cl in CH3CI is 176.7 pm. The covalent 
radius of Cl-atom being known as 99.4 pm, that of C-atom can be calculated by subtracting this 
value from C-Cl bond length. So, the covalent radius of C-atom = 17 6.7- 99.4 = 77.3 pm.
Fig (6.3) Covalent radius of H atom, (75.4/2 = 37.7 pm)
Animation 6.8: Covalent Radii
Source & Credit : boundless126 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The variation of covalent radii in groups and periods is almost the same as of atomic radii. 
Since energy changes are involved in the bond formation, so thermodyna mic properties of elements 
need to be discussed before understanding the chemical bond.
6.3 IONIZATION ENERGY, ELECTRON AFFINITY AND 
ELECTRONEGATIVITY
6.3.1 Ionization Energy
 The ionization energy of an element is the minimum energy required to remove an electron 
from its gaseous atom to form an ion. The process is called ioni zation, e.g.
     →∆+ - -1Mg Mg + e H=738kJmol
Table (6.3) First ionization energies, electron afin ities and 
electronegativities values of elements136 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 In the gaseous phase, the atoms and ions are isolated and are free from all external inluences. 
Thus, the ionization energy is the qualitative measure of the stability  of an isolated atom. The irst 
ionization energies of elements are given in Table (6.3).
Factors Inluencing the Ionization Energies
It is observed that the ionization energies of atoms depend upon the followi ng factors.
(i)  Atomic radius of atom
(ii)  Nuclear charge or proton number of the atom
(iii) Shielding efect of inner electrons
(iv)  Nature of orbital
Animation 6.9: Ionization Energy
Source & Credit : kaiserscience.wordpress146 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Variation of Ionization Energy in the Periodic Tabl e
 In the periodic table, the ionization energies increase from left to r ight in a period with the 
increase in the proton number, until a maximum value is reached at the end of the period. This may 
be explained in terms of the periodicity of the electronic coniguration of elements. Each period 
begins with an element which has one electron in its valence shell and ends with the completion 
of an electronic shell. The increase in the atomic number is ass ociated with the increase in nuclear 
charge which leads to a stronger force of attraction between the nucl eus and the increasing number 
of electrons. The stronger force of attraction, ultimately results in di icult removal of electrons.
In groups, the ionization energy decrease in spite of the increase in proton number or nuclear 
charge. This  is due to successive addition of electronic shells as a result of which the valence 
electrons are placed at a larger distance from the nucleus. As th e force of attraction between 
the nucleus and the outer electron decreases with the increase in dis tance, the electron can be 
removed more easily or with less energy. Moreover, the force of attraction al so decreases due to 
increasing shielding efect of the intervening electrons. 
Animation 6.10: Factors Inluencing the Ionization E nergies
Source & Credit : kaiserscience.wordpress156 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The  ionization energies of group III-A and VI-A show abnorma l trend. This can be understood 
from the distribution of the electrons.
Higher Ionization Energies
 So far, we have explained the irst ionization energy. The energy req uired to remove an 
electron after the removal of irst electron is called second ionization ener gy.
    →∆++ - -1Mg Mg + e H=1450kJmol
Animation 6.11: Variation of Atomic Radii in the Pe riodic Table
Source & Credit : dynamicscience166 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Similarly, the  energy required to remove third electron after the rem oval of second one is 
called the third ionization energy, and it is 7730k J for Mg. It means that the ionization energy val -
ues undergo an increase with the increase in the number of electron s to be removed. This is due 
to the reason that second electron is removed from a positively charged ion rather than a neutral 
atom. The dominant positive charge holds the electrons more tightly an d thus further removal of 
electrons becomes more diicult.
 Ionization energy is an index to the metallic character. The elemen ts having low ionization 
energies are metals and those having high ionization energies are non-metals. Those with interme -
diate values are mostly metalloids.
 The gaps in the irst, second, third and higher ionization energ ies help us to guess the valency 
of an element. If, there is suicient gap between irst ionization energy  and second one, then the 
element shows valency of one.
Animation 6.12: Higher Ionization Energies
Source & Credit : 800mainstreet176 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.3.2 Electron Afinity
 The electron ainity of an atom is the energy released when an electron a dds to an empty 
or partially illed orbital of an isolated gaseous atom in its valen ce energy level to form an anion 
having a unit negative charge , e.g.
     
         
Since, energy is released, so electron ainity is given the negative sig n. Electron ainity is the 
measure of the attraction of the nucleus of an atom for the extra electron. The electron ainities of 
elements of the periodic table are given in Table (6.3).
Factors Inluencing the Electron Afinity
 The electron ainities, like ionization energies, are inluenced by th e factors such as atomic 
radius, the nuclear charge and the shielding efect of inner electr ons.
Animation 6.13: Electron Afinity
Source & Credit : hcchrisp.blogspot( ) ( )- - -1Cl g + e Cl g H=-349kJmol →∆186 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
As  the force of attraction between the valence electrons and the nucleus d ecrease with the increase 
in the atomic radius, the electron ainities usually decrease.
Variation in the Periodic Table
 In a period, the atomic radius decreases due to increase in the nu clear charge. Thus, the 
electron ainities of elements increase from left to right in the periodic table. That is why, the alkali 
metals have the lowest and the halogens have the highest electron ainities. In groups, on the 
other hand, the atomic radii increase with the increase in the proton  number due to successive 
increase of electronic shells. 
 This also exerts a shielding efect on the force of attraction between the nucleus and the 
valence electrons. Thus, the electron ainities usually decrease from top  to bottom.
Animation 6.14: Factors Inluencing the Electron Afi nity
Source & Credit : northhillsprep196 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 There are, of course, exceptions to this generalization e.g. luorine h as electron ainity less 
than that of chlorine, Table (6.3). Actually, luorine has very small size and seven electrons in 2s and 
2p subshells have thick electronic cloud. This thick cloud repels the incoming electron.
 The elements of group IIA, VA and VIII show abnormally low values in every period of the 
periodic table. This can be understood from their electronic conigur ations.
6.3.3 Electronegativity
 For a homonuclear diatomic molecule e.g. H2, the bonding pair of electrons is equally shared 
between the atoms. On the other hand, in a bond between dissimilar a toms such as in HF the 
electron density of the bonding electrons lies more towards the luorine atom  than towards the 
hydrogen atom. The tendency of an atom to attract a shared electron pair towards its elf is called 
its electronegativity.
Animation 6.15: Variation in the Periodic Table
Source & Credit : vocativ206 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
It  is related to the ionization energy and the electron ainity of the elemen t. Thus, luorine atom 
is more electronegative than hydrogen atom. Pauling calculated the electr onegativity values of 
elements from the diference between the expected bond energies for their normal  covalent bond 
and the experimentally determined values. 
He devised an electronegativity scale on which luorine is given an ar bitrary standard value 4.0. It 
is the most electronegative element. The electronegativity values of other elements a re compared 
with luorine, and are given in Table (6.3). Electronegativity has  no units.
Variation of Electronegativities in Periodic Table
 A comparison of electronegativities shows that the values increase in a period with the 
decrease in atomic size. These values decrease in a group as the s ize of the atoms increase. The 
electronegativity diferences of the elements can be related to the properties of b onds such as 
dipole moments and bond energies.
The diference in the electronegativity values of the bonded atoms is an in dex to the polar nature 
of the covalent bond. When the diference is zero, the bond between the two atoms  is non-polar. 
Thus, all the bonds which are formed between similar atoms are n onpolar in character, while those 
formed between diferent elements are mostly polar. Elements of widely dif erent electronegativities 
form ionic bonds.
Animation 6.16: Electronegativity
Source & Credit : makeagif216 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 A diference of 1.7 units shows roughly equal contributions of i onic and covalent bonds. Some 
examples of polar and non-polar bonds are discussed under coval ent bond in section 6.4.1. 
  Having understood the periodic properties of elements, let us discus s types of bonds.
6.4 TYPES OF BONDS
 Chemical bonds can be classiied as :
 (i)  Ionic bond
 (ii)  Covalent bond
 (iii)  Coordinate covalent bond
 We shall explain these bonds with the help of diferent theories of ch emical bonding. First of 
all let us discuss the Lewis concept of bond formation.
Animation 6.17: Variation of Electronegativities in  Periodic Table
Source & Credit : kaiserscience.wordpress226 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.4.1 LEWIS CONCEPT
With the help of this concept, we can understand the tendencies of el ements to have relation with 
each other.
Animation 6.18: TYPES OF BONDS
Source & Credit : employees.csbsju
Animation 6.19: LEWIS CONCEPT
Source & Credit : nku236 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(i) Ionic Bond
According to the Lewis theory, ionic bond is formed  by the complete transfer of electron 
or electrons from an atom with low ionization energy t o another atom with high electron 
ainity.  In energy terms, the electropositive elements are at a higher energy state th an the 
electronegative elements. The energy diference  will be responsible for the transfer of electrons 
from a higher energy state to a lower energy state.
Let us consider, the example of the formation of potassium chloride. T he electronic coniguration 
of potassium is Is2 2s2 2p6  3s2 3p6 4s1. It may be represented as K (2,8,8,1). It tends to lose the 
outermost electron and to form K+ ion. The energy needed to detach an electron from potassium 
atom is equal to its irst ionization energy. So         
                               -1K(2,8,8,1) K (2,8,8) e H=419.0kJmol+−→+ ∆
   The oppositely charged K+ and Cl- ions are held together by strong electrostatic force of attraction. 
K+ and Cl- ions arrange themselves to form a crystal lattice where proportionate nu mber of cations 
and anions are packed together. The energy released during the for mation of crystal lattice is 690 
kJmol-1. It is called lattice energy of KCl.
 After the loss of an electron, potassium attains the nearest inert gas coniguration of Ar 
(2,8,8). Chlorine atom has the electronic coniguration Is2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p5 or Cl (2,8,7). It tends to 
gain electron lost from potassium atom to attain the nearest inert gas con iguration of Ar (2,8,8) 
releasing 348.6 kJmol-1 energy. This energy corresponds to the electron ainity of chlorine.
    −−⋅+ → ∆ 
 -1:Cl :Cl : H=-349kJmole
Similarly, the elements of I-A Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs are good los ers of electron. The elements of VII-A, F, Cl, 
Br, I are good gainers. So, ionic bonds are there in these atoms.  A similar type of bond is expected 
between elements of group II-A and VI-A.246 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
  
In most of the cases the formation of dipositive, tripositive and dinega tive ions takes place as 
follows:
   Ca (2,8,8,2)     Ca2+ (2,8,8)+2e-
   Al (2,8,3)     Al3+ (2,8)+3e-
   O (2,6) + 2e-    O2- (2,8)
   S (2,8,6) + 2e-    S2- (2,8,8)
 Calcium oxide contains ions in the ratio of Ca2+ : O2- and its formula is CaO, while in aluminium 
oxide, Al3+ and O2- ions are present in the ratio 2 :3. Its formula is Al2 O3. Similarly, CaS and Al2S3, are 
also ionic compounds to some extent. 
 The compounds formed by the cations and anions are called ioni c or electrovalent  
compounds. There exists a strong electrostatic force of attraction between c ations and anions in 
these compounds.
 Criteria of electronegativity also helps us to understand the nature of bond. So, in order to 
decide the % of ionic nature in a compound, it is better to note the difer ence of electronegativity 
between the bonded atoms. If the diference is 1.7 or more than that, then  the bond is said to be 
ionic. Keeping this aspect in view, NaCl has 72% ionic char acter. CsF has 92% ionic character and 
calculations tell us that there is no bond with 100% ionic cha racter.
Animation 6.20: Ionic Bond
Source & Credit : gcsechemistryhelp.tumblr256 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(ii)  Covalent Bond (electron pair bond)
 According to Lewis and Kossel, a covalent bond is formed by the mu tual sharing of electrons 
between two atoms . While sharing, each atom completes its valence shell and attain s the nearest 
inert gas coniguration. A covalent bond may be non-polar or polar in character.
Non-Polar Covalent Bonds
  
 In  such bonds, the bonding electron pairs are equally shared . For example, in H2 or Cl2 
molecules, the two electrons forming the covalent bond are equally shar ed by the two identical 
atoms having same electronegativities. 
 Hydrogen  
                H : H or H - H  Chlorine  
                         
:Cl x
.Clx
x    or Cl----Cl
         
Animation 6.21: Covalent Bond (electron pair bond)
Source & Credit : edcoogle
xx
xx266 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Due to an even distribution of charge, the bonded atoms remain electric ally neutral.The other 
such molecules are F2, Br2 and I2.Similarly, CCl4 is a non-polar compound. This is due to cancellation 
of all the dipoles of this molecules due to its symmetry. Actually, all the C-Cl bonds are polar, but 
molecule is non-polar overall.
 Tetrachloromethane  
 :Cl:
:Cl :C: Cl:
:Cl:
 
 
  or 
          Cl 
Cl C Cl 
 Cl 
  The  molecules like CH4, SiH4, and SiCl4 also follow the same attitude of non-polarity due to 
symmetry of structure.
Polar Covalent Bonds
 When two diferent atoms are joined by a covalent bond, the electron pair  is not equally 
shared between the bonded atoms. The bonding pair of electrons will be displaced towards the 
more electronegative atom
Animation 6.22: Non-Polar Covalent Bonds
Source & Credit : bsc2.ehb-schweiz2276 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
This would make one end of the molecule partially positive and the other partially negative as 
shown by the following examples.
 Hydrogen  fluoride      Water  
  
H×F:  or +-H x Fδδ
  
H×O×H or 
           δ+H δ+O 
  δ+H 
 Methyl chloride  
 
                               
                                                
                                                                 
                                                                            
                                                   
                   H 
 δ+C  
H   H δ-Cl  
Methanol is an other best example of a polar covalent molecule, becaus e it contains a polar bond.
 Methanol  
                                    or   
          H 
H δ+C  
δ-O 
   H  δ-H  
An atom can share more than one electrons to form what is called a  double or triple bond. The 
examples are O2, N2, CO2, CS2, etc. 
 N2 is an inert gas having a strong triple bond.
 Nitrogen  
  :N:::N:  or  ≡:N N:or
xx
xx
xxH
H: C H
HO
..xxxx
xxxH: C
HH
Cl
...286 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The molecule: of 02 makes a double bond.
 Oxygen  
   
 O::O  or   
 O=O
 Here, carbon dioxide  is a non-polar covalent compound, although it is formed from 
heteroatoms. The linear structure balances the polar character on both sides of the carbon atom.
 Carbon dioxide  
   :O::C::O: or   
 O=C=O
 Here, each  bond represents a pair of electrons. Thus, in the form ation of a double bond (=), 
two shared pairs and in that of a triple bond ( ≡), three shared pairs of electrons are involved.
 Some of the non-metallic atoms, particularly carbon atoms mutual ly share their electrons 
with each other. This  leads to the formation of extended chains whic h is the basis of the formation 
of large sized molecules called macromolecules. Diamond, graph ite and SiC are the best examples 
of such molecules. 
 Carbon can make single, double and triple covalent bonds in a lkanes, alkenes and alkynes.
Animation 6.23: Polar Covalent Bonds
Source & Credit : bsc2.ehb-schweiz2296 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Ethan  
   
  
 HH
H :C: C: H
HH  or     H H 
H C C H 
 H H 
Silicon also gives similar type of hydrides, called silanes. The formula of disilane is like that of 
ethane.
 Disilane  
   
 HH
H :Si: Si: H
HH   or   
            H H 
H Si Si H 
 H H 
 The  compounds of carbon and hydrogen showing double and trip le bonds are called alkenes 
and alkynes. Let us, take the examples of ethene and ethyne.
 Ethan           Ethan  
  ::
::HH
C: :C
HH or      H:C C:H  or ≡ H-C C-H
       H  H 
C=C 
H  H 
(iii) Coordinate Covalent Bond
 A coordinate covalent bond is formed between two atoms when the shared pair of electrons 
is donated by one of the bonded atoms. Let us consider, the example of  bond formation between 
NH3 and BF3. NH, has three covalent bonds and there is a lone pair of electrons  on nitrogen atom. 
On the other hand, boron atom in BF3 is deicient in electrons. Actually, the octet of B is not complete 
in BF3. Therefore, nitrogen can donate the pair of electrons to the acceptor BF3 and this results in 
the formation of a coordinate covalent bond.306 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The complex so produced is overall neutral, and charges are ind icated on N and B atoms. 
In some of the compounds, after the formation of a coordinate covalent bond , the distinction 
between covalent bond and coordinate bond vanishes.
 Water donates its electron pair to H+ ion to give H30+ ion. All the three bonds between oxygen 
and hydrogen have equal status. Every bond is 33% coordinate covalen t and 66% covalent.
Similarly, all  the alcohols and ethers ofer their lone pairs to H+, just like water to give coordinate 
covalent bonds. The ions so produced are called oxonium ions.
Ammonia donates its  electron pair to H+ ion to give NH4+ ion. All the four bonds behave alike, in 
NH4+ion.316 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 All  the primary, secondary and tertiary amines like ammonia  make such bonds with H+. PH3 
combines with H+ to give PH4+ ion called phosphonium ion. Coordinate covalent bonds are present 
in HNO3. Many oxyacids of halogens, like (HClO2, HClO3, HClO4) have coordinate covalent bonds 
between chlorine and oxygen.
6.4.2 MODERN THEORIES OF COVALENT BOND
Limitations of Lewis Model
Classical Lewis model does explain, that how atoms are bonded to on e another. It also tells, how 
the electron pairs are shared between the bonded atoms. But a logical  question arises:
Are these explanations just enough to justify the diversiied world of m olecules and how do the 
electrons avoid each other inspite of their repulsions? 
 The answer simply lies in the fact, that the Lewis model seems to b e an over simpliication. 
Shapes of molecules are very important because many physical a nd chemical properties depend 
upon three dimensional arrangement of their atoms.326 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 A true model should be able to justify molecular shapes and geom etries of molecules, bond 
polarities, bond distances and various energy transitions as eviden t by spectroscopic techniques. 
This  model should also make clear the unique behaviouria! fea tures of molecules during chemical 
reactions.
 Following are the modern theories, which explain satisfactorily the above requirements for 
covalent bond formation, based on wave-mechanical structure of atoms:
1.  Valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR Theory )
2.  Valence bond theory (VBT)
3.  Molecular orbital theory (MOT)
 In addition to above, crystal ield theory and ligand ield theory ex plain  the formation of 
coordination complex compounds formed by transition metals.
Animation 6.24: MODERN THEORIES OF COVALENT BOND
Source & Credit : chem.umass336 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.4.3 VALENCE SHELL ELECTRON PAIR REPULSION THEORY
 Sidgwick and Powell (1940) pointed out that the shapes of molecul es could be interpreted 
in terms of electron pairs in the outer orbit of the central atom. Recen tly, Nylholm and Gillespie 
developed VSEPR theory, which explains the shapes of molecules for n on- transition elements.
 
Animation 6.25: Limitations of Lewis Model
Source & Credit : en.wikipedia346 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Basic Assumption
 The valence electron pairs (lone pairs and the bond pairs) are arranged around the central 
atom to remain at a maximum distance apart to keep repulsions at a minimum.
Postulates of VSEPR Theory
(i)  Both the lone pairs as well as the bond pairs participa te in determining the geometry of the 
molecules.
(ii)  The electron pairs are arranged around the central polyval ent atom so as to remain at a 
maximum distance apart to avoid repulsions.
(iii)  The electron pairs of lone pairs occupy more space than the bond pairs. 
A bonding electron pair is attracted by both nuclei of atoms while non- bonding by only one nucleus. 
Because a lone pair experiences less nuclear attraction, its electron ic charge is spread out more in 
space than that for bonding pair. As a result, the non- bondin g electron pairs exert greater repulsive 
forces on bonding electron pairs and thus tend to compress the bond pairs. 
The magnitude of repulsions between the electron pairs in a given m olecule decreases in the 
following order:
    Lone pair- lone pair > lone pair -bond pair > bond pair  - bond pair
These repulsions are called van der Waals repulsions
Animation 6.26: VALENCE SHELL ELECTRON PAIR REPULSI ON THEORY
Source & Credit : barmaton.info356 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 (iv)  The two electron pairs of a double bond and three electron pai rs of a triple bond, contain 
a higher electronic charge density. Therefore, they  occupy more spa ce than one electron pair of 
a single bond, but behave like a single electron pair in determini ng the geometry of the molecule. 
This is because, they tend to occupy the same region between the two nu clei like a single bond.
 In  order to illustrate this theory, let us consider, that the central  atom is ‘A’ and this atom is 
polyvalent. More than one ‘B’ type atoms are linked with ‘A’ to give AB2, AB3, AB4, etc. type molecules. 
It depends upon the valency of A, that how many B are attached with that. Following Table (6.4) 
gives the shapes of diferent types of molecules.
Type Electron Pairs Arrangement
of pairsMolecular
geometryShape Example
Total Bonding Lone
AB22 2 0 Linear Linear B-A-B BeCl2
HgCl2
AB333 0
Trigonal
planarTrignol
planar
BH3, BF3
AlCl3
2 1 Bent (or
angular)
SnCl2, 
SO2
AB444 0
TetrahedralTetrahedral
CH4, 
SiCl4,
CCl4, BF4,
NH4+, 
SO42-
3 1 Trignol
pyramidal
NH3, NF3,
PH3
2 2Bent (or
angular
 H2O, H2STable (6.4) Shapes of molecules according to VSPER Th eory366 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
1  Molecules Containing Two Electron Pairs (AB2 type)
 In such, molecules two electrons, pairs around the central 
atom are arranged at farther distance apart at an angle of 180° , in 
order to minimize repulsions between them. Thus, they form a linear  
geometry. 
 Beryllium chloride is a typical linear molecule, which con tains 
two electrons pairs. MgCl2, CaCl2, SrCl2. CdCL2 and HgCl2 are also 
linear molecules. The central atoms have two electrons in outer most 
orbitals.
2.  Molecules Containing Three Electron Pairs — (AB3 type:)
(a)  AB3 Type with no Lone Pairs
 In such molecules, central atom contains three bonding electron p airs, which are arranged at 
maximum distance apart at a mutual angle of 120°, giving a  triangular planar geometry. The boron 
atom in BH3  is surrounded by three charge clouds, which remain farthest apart in one plane, each 
pointing towards the corners of an equilateral triangle. Thus, BH3, molecules has a trigonal planar 
geometry, with each H- B-H bond angles of 120°.
 We expect similar geometries in hydrides of group III-A (AlH3, GaH3, InH3 and TlH3)and their 
halides (BF3, AlCl3 ,etc.)
(b)  AB3-Type with One Lone Pair and Two Bond Pairs
  In SnCl2, one of the corner of the triangle is occupied by a lone pair, givi ng rise to a distorted 
triangular structure in vapour phase.376 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(c)  AB3-Type with Multiple Bonds
 In SO2, one corner of triangle is occupied by a lone pair and two cor ners 
each by S=O double bond, while in SO3 all three regions, each are occupied by 
S = O bonds. This structure of SO3 is perfectly triangular.
(iii)  Molecules Containing Four Electron Pairs (AB4- Type:)
(a)  AB4 Type with no Lone Pairs
 The charge clouds due to four electron pairs avoid their electrostatic 
repulsions by drifting apart, so as to maintain a mutual bond  angle of 109.5 °. 
Such geometry enables to a form a shape of regular tetrahedron.
Examples:
 Each of the four valence electrons of carbon pair up with sole elec tron of 
hydrogen in methane.
    2 1111
6C = 1s , 2s , 2px , 2py , 2py
 The four electron pairs are directed from the center towards the corner s 
of a regular tetrahedron, with each apex representing a hydrogen  nucleus. 
The arrangement permits a non-planar arrangement of electron pair s. Each 
H-C-H bond is perfectly 109.5 °. On the same grounds, SiH4, GeH4, CCl4 form 
similar geometries. This structure has four corners, four faces,  six edges and 
six bond angles.
(b)  AB4 - Type with One Lone Pair and Three Bond Pairs
 In such cases, the charge cloud of lone pair electrons (nonbondi ng 
electrons) spreads out more than that of bonding electrons.386 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
As a result, some what large lone pair charge cloud tend to compr ess  the bond angles in rest of 
the molecules.
 Ammonia, 3NH is a typical example.
  22 1 1 1
7 xyzN = 1s , 2s , 2p , 2p , 2p
 The non-bonding electron in 2s orbital takes up more space and ex erts a strong repulsive 
force on the bonding electron pairs. Consequently, to avoid a larger r epulsion, the bonding electron 
pairs move closer that reduces the ideal bond angle from 109.50 to 107.5°. This efect compels 
ammonia to assume a triangular pyramidal geometry instead of tetra hedral, as in methane.
 Similar, afects are evident in the geometries of molecules like 333PH , AsH , SbH     and 3BiH. 
Substitution of hydrogen with electronegative atoms like F or Cl further  reduces the bond angle. 
In NF3, the strong polarity of N-F bond pulls the lone pair of N atom c loser to its nucleus, which in 
turn exerts a stronger repulsion over bonding electrons. Thus, the an gle further shrinks to 102°. 
Moreover, the bond pairs N-F bonds are more close to F atoms than N a toms. The increased 
distances in these bond pairs makes their repulsions less operati ve.
Animation 6.27: Molecules Containing Two Electron P airs (AB2 type)
Source & Credit : employees.csbsju396 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(c)  AB4-Type with Two lone Pairs and Two Bond Pairs:
 Presence of two lone pairs, introduces three types of repulsion i.e. l one pair-lone pair, lone 
pair-bond pair and bond pair-bond pair repulsion. For exa mple: water (H2O), a triatomic molecule 
is expected to be an AB2 type linear molecule like BeCl2 and CO2. But, experimental evidences 
conirm a bent or angular geometry. VSEPR theory, successfully j ustiies the experimental results 
by arguing the participation of lone pairs, in addition to bond pairs in determining overall geometry 
of water molecule.
  222 1 1
8 xyzO = 1s , 2s , 2p , 2p , 2p
Animation 6.28: Molecules Containing Three Electron  Pairs — (AB;i type:)
Source & Credit : nano-ou406 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Two  of the corners of a tetrahedron are occupied by each of the two lone pairs and remaining 
by bond pairs. But owing to spatial arrangement of lone pairs a nd their repulsive action among 
themselves and on bond pairs, the bond angle is further reduced to 1 04.5°. H2S, H2Se, H2Te form 
similar geometries.
6.4.4 Valence Bond Theory (VBT)
 VSERP theory predicts and explains the shapes of molecules bu t does not give reasons for 
the formation of bonds. VBT is concerned with both the formation of bon ds and the shapes of 
molecules. This method of describing a covalent bond considers the molecule as a combination 
of atoms. According to the quantum mechanical approach, a covalen t bond is formed when half-
illed orbitals in the outer or valence shells of two atoms overlap, so tha t a pair of electrons, one 
electron from each atom, occupies the overlapped orbital, As a result of  this overlap, the electrons 
with opposite spins become paired to stabilized themselves. 
 Larger the overlap, the stronger is the bond. The essential condition  for chemical bonding, 
is that the orbitals of atoms participating in bond formation must overlap and the direction of the 
bond is determined by the direction of the two overlapping orbitals.
 The formation of few molecules as a result of s and s orbital overl ap, s and p orbital overlap 
and p and p orbital overlap are discussed below.
 The formation of a hydrogen molecules according to VB theory is s hown in Fig. (6.4). As the 
two atoms approach each other, their 1s orbitals overlap, thereby givi ng the H-H bond. 
The  electron density becomes concentrated between the two nuclei. The bond  is called a sigma ( s) 
bond and it is deined as follows:
 A  single bond is formed when two partially illed atomic orbital s overlap in such a way that 
the probability of inding the electron is maximum around the line joining the two nuclei.
Fig. (6.4) s and s orbital overlap in H2416 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Let’s look at a molecule hydrogen luoride, 
HF. The H-F bond is fomed by the pairing of 
electrons - one from hydrogen and one from 
luorine. According to VB theory, we must 
have two half-illed orbitals - one from each 
atom that can be joined by overlap.
  1H = 1s
  9yF 2s2p 2p 2pxz =   
 The  overlap of orbitals provides 
a means for sharing electrons, thereby 
allowing each atom to complete its valence 
shell. The luorine atom completes its 2p 
subshell by acquiring a share of an electron 
from hydrogen as shown below.
     9yF 2s2p 2p 2pxz =   
 
The  requirements for bond formation are met by overlapping the half- illed Is orbital of hydrogen 
with the half-illed 2p orbital of luorine. There are then two orbital s plus two electrons whose spins 
can adjust so they are paired. The formation of the bond is illu strated in Fig.(6.5)
 The  bond in the luorine molecule, F2 is formed by the overlap of half-illed 2pz orbital on each 
luorine atom,Fig (6.6).
Animation 6.29: Valence Bond Theory (VBT)
Source & Credit : chem.umass
Fig. (6.5) The formation of the hydrogen luoride molecule s.426 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Covalent bonds can also form by side-to-side overlap of p orbitals, as shown in Fig.(6.7). The result 
is a pi ( p) bond, in which the greatest electron density lies above and below th e internuclear axis. 
Consider, the bonding between  nitrogen atoms having the electronic conig uration 221s 2s 2p 2p 2pxyz
. The three unpaired electrons on each atom are located in perpendicu lar p orbitals, which are 
oriented so that if one end-to-end p orbital overlap occurs (resulting in a sigma bond), the other two 
p orbital cannot overlap in the same fashion. Rather, they are al igned parallel to the corresponding 
orbital in the other atom Fig(6.8).
Fig.(6.6) The formation of the luorine molecule.
Fig. (6.7) The sideway overlap of two atomic
p orbitals to give a n bond.Fig. (6.8) The two nitrogen atoms showing
one sigma bond and two n bonds436 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Now, let  us look at the molecule of H2S. This is a non-linear molecule, and the bond angle 
between the two H-S bonds is about 92°. 
 Each  two 3p orbitals of sulphur containing one electron can overl ap with the 1s orbitals of 
hydrogen atoms.
   y S 3s3p 3p 3pxz =   
 Thus, the VBT requires the idea of overlap to explain the geometry of the hydrogen sulphide 
molecule, Fig. (6.9).
6.4.5 Atomic Orbital Hybridization and Shapes of Mo lecules
 So far we have regarded overlap taking place between unmodiied atomic  orbitals. Formation 
of some molecules present problems.
Fig. (6.9) Bonding in H2S showing overlap of orbitals446 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 We  face the problem of explaining equivalent tetra-valency of car bon and the bond angles 
in H2O and NH3 molecules. In order to explain the formation of bonds and shapes  or geometry of 
molecules, the idea of hybridization has been introduced.
 According  to this, atomic orbitals difering slightly in energy  intermix to form new orbitals, 
which are called hybrid atomic orbitals. They difer from the p arent atomic orbitals in shape and 
possess speciic geometry.
The atomic orbital hybridization gives a satisfactory explanation for the valency of the elements. 
In some cases, the electrons belonging to the ground state are promoted to th e excited state as a 
result of which there is an increase in the number of unpaired electrons.
 These excited orbitals undergo hybridization simultaneously, bec ause promotion of electrons 
and hybridization is a simultaneous process. The energy requi red for the excitation is compensated 
by the energy released during hybridization and the process of b ond formation with other atoms. 
Hybridization leads to entirely new shape and orientation of the valen ce orbitals of an atom. It 
holds signiicant importance in determining the shape and geometry of molecules.
 Depending upon the number and nature of the orbitals participatin g in hybridization, diferent 
types of hybridization take place. For example, s and p orbital s of simple atoms are hybridized to 
give sp3, sp2 and sp hybridized orbitals.
(i)  sp3 Hybridization
 In sp3 hybridization, one s and three p atomic orbitals intermix to form four equivalent orbitals 
called sp3 hybrid atomic orbitals. Let us discuss the structures of CH4 ,NH3 and H2O by understanding 
the sp3 hybridization of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen-atoms.456 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Bonding and Structure of Methane, Ammonia and Water
 The electronic distribution of carbon atom should be kept in mind  to understand intermixing 
of orbitals.Electronic coniguration of 6C, its electronic excitation and hybrization is giyen as follow s.
C6=(ground state) 0
z 1s2s2p 2p 2pxy =   
C6=(excited state) z 1s2s 2p 2p 2pxy =    
C6=(hybridized state) 33331s sp sp sp sp=  
Animation 6.30: Atomic Orbital Hybridization and Sh apes of Molecules
Source & Credit : web.clark466 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The e nergies of hybrid orbitals are lower than unhybridized  orbitals. Following diagram Fig. 
(6.10) shows, 
how outermost four atomic orbitals of carbon mix up to give four hybr id orbitals of equal energy and shape. 
hen 90°.
 The four new hybrid orbitals of equal energy have a tetrahedral g eometry with carbon at 
the centre. The four equivalent hybrid orbitals are directed towards th e four corners of a regular 
tetrahedron. Each sp3 hybrid orbital consists of two lobes, one larger and the other smal ler. For the 
sake of simplicity, the small lobe is usually not shown while  representing sp3 hybrid orbitals. 
The hybrid orbitals are oriented in space in 
such a manner that the angle between them 
is 109.5° as shown in Fig(6.11a,b). Methane 
molecule is formed by the overlap of sp3 
hybrid orbitals of carbon with 1s orbitals of 
four hydrogen atoms separately to form four 
sigma bonds. The molecule, thus formed, 
possesses a tetrahedral geometry. The four 
C-H bonds which result from sp3 -s overlaps 
are directed towards the corners of a regular 
tetrahedron. There are six bond angles each 
109.5°. The tetrahedral structure of CH4 has four faces, four corners and six edges.
Fig (6.10) sp3 hybridization of carbon atom
to give four sp3-hybrid orbitals
Fig(6.11) Four sp3-s overlaps in tetrahedral structure of CH4 molecule.476 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(b)  Ammonia
 To understand the sp3 hybridization of nitrogen-atom in NH3, we should know electronic 
coniguration of 7N.
7N (ground state)z 1s2s2p 2p 2pxy =    
7N (hybridized state) 33331s sp sp sp sp=   
 One s and three p orbitals of nitrogen atom hybridize to form four sp3 hybrid atomic orbitals. 
They are directed towards the four corners of a tetrahedron. One of the h ybrid orbitals is completely 
illed with electrons and the remaining three orbitals are half ill ed. The nitrogen atom undergoes 
three sp3-s overlaps with three s-orbitals of hydrogen atoms. The three hydroge n atoms are located 
at three corners whereas the lone pair of electrons is at the fourth cor ner of the tetrahedron. The 
result is a pyramidal molecule in which the three hydrogen atoms  form the base and the lone pair 
of electrons the apex Fig(6.12). 
 The experimentally determined angle in ammonia is 107.5°. The deviation from the tetrahedral 
angle (109.5°) is explained on the basis of repulsion between the lone pair and the bond pairs of 
electrons. The lone pair is closer to the nucleus of nitrogen, then the b ond pair and bond angles are 
decreased.
Fig (6.12) Three sp3- s overlaps in NH3 molecule to form a pyramidal structure.486 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(c)  Water, H20
  To know the structure of water write down the electronic coniguration of  8O:
8O (ground state) z 1s2s2p 2p 2pxy =    
8O (hybridized state)  33331s sp sp sp sp=    
 Here, 2s and three 2p orbitals of oxygen hybridize to form four sp3 hybrid orbitals which will 
have a tetrahedral arrangement. Two hybrid orbitals are completely i lled by the two available 
lone pairs of electrons. The remaining two half illed hybrid orb itals undergo sp3-s overlaps with H 
atoms to form two sigma bonds. The two H atoms occupy two corners of the tetrahedron and the 
remaining two are occupied by two lone pairs of electrons, Fig(6.1 3).
 The bond angle in water is 104.5°. The deviation from the tetrahe dral angle (109.5°) is explained 
on the basis of repulsion between the two lone pairs of electrons, with b ond pairs. The lone pairs 
are closer to the nucleus of oxygen. They repel bond pairs and the bond angle decreases from 
109.5° to 104.5°. So, the molecule of water has bent or angular structure.
Fig (6.13) sp3-s overlaps in H20 to form an angular structure496 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(ii)  sp2- Hybridization
 In sp2 hybridization, one ‘s’ and two ‘p’ atomic orbitals of an atom i ntermix three orbitals called 
sp2 hybrid orbitals.
 Bonding and Structure of Boron Triluoride and Ethene
(a)  Boron Triluoride (BF3)
 The three half illed sp2 hybrid orbitals are planar and are oriented at an angle of 12 0°, 
Fig(6.14). The sp2 hybridization explains the geometry of planar molecules such as  BF3. Electronic 
coniguration of 5B is,
5B (ground state)  00
z 1s2s 2p 2p 2pxx =  
5B (excited state)  0
z 1s2s2p 2p 2pxy =   
5B (hybridized state)  2221s sp sp sp=
 In sp2 hybridization, one s and two p atomic orbitals of an atom intermi x to form three orbital 
called sp2 hybrid orbitals. 
Fig (6.14) Three sp2 hybridized orbitals in one plane and at 120° to each other.506 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
One of the p orbitals of luorine is half illed i.e. 2pz. This p-orbital of F is in the form of a lobe. BF3 
is formed by the overlap of three half illed sp2 hybrid orbitals of boron with lobe shaped p-orbitals 
of three luorine atoms Fig.(6.15). The structure is triangular p laner.
(b)  Ethene (CH2=CH2)
 Electronic coniguration of 6C is
6C (ground state)  0
z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy =   
6C (excited state)  z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy =    
6C (hybridized state)  2221s sp sp sp 2pz =  
 In the formation of ethene molecule, each carbon atom undergoes sp2 hybridization to form 
three hybrid orbitals which are co-planar and are oriented at an  angle of 120°. Each atom is left 
with one half illed p-orbital perpendicular to the planar sp2 hybrid orbitals.
Fig. (6.15) sp2-p overlaps in BF3 to
form triangular planar structure.516 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
One of the p-orbitals does not take part in hybridization. Each ca rbon atom undergoes sp2-s overlaps 
with two hydrogen atoms and sp2-sp2 overlap between themselves  to form sigma bonds. These 
overlaps lead to the shapes shown in Fig.(6.16a). The partially  illed p-orbitals undergo sidwrays 
overlap to form a p−bond. 
 So, a p-bond is formed by the sideways 
overlap of two half illed co-planar p-orbitals 
in such a way that the probability of inding 
the electron is maximum perpendicular to the 
line joining the two nuclei.  It should be made 
clear that a p-bond is formed between  two 
atoms only when they are already bonded 
with a sigma bond. 
 The two clouds of the p-bond are 
perpendicular  to the plane in which ive 
p-bonds are lying. Just like s-bond, p -bond can 
be represented by a line as in Fig (6.16 b). The 
inal shape of C2H4 is shown in Fig. (6.16 c).
(iii)  sp-Hybridization
 In sp hybridization, one ‘s’ and one ‘p’ orbitals.intermix to f orm two sp-hybrid orbital called sp 
hybrid orbitals.
 Bonding and Structure of Beryllium Dichloride and Eth yne
(a)  Beryllium Bichloride
Electronic coniguration of 4Be is
Fig. (6.16) Formation of one sigma between
two carbon atoms and one p-bond in C2H4.526 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
4Be (ground state) 0 00
z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy = 
4Be (excited state) 00
z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy =  
4Be (hybridized state) 1s spsp=  
 The two sp hybrid orbitals lie in linear way, Fig (6.17).  The sp hybridization explains the 
geometry of linear molecules such as beryllium chloride, BeCl2. It is formed when two sp hybrid 
orbitals of Be atom overlap with the half illed p-orbitals of chlori ne atoms. The outermost half 
illed 3pz orbital of Cl has lobe shape.
 Be atom lies at the center and two Cl atoms on either side so that the Cl -Be-Cl angle is 180°.
(b)  Ethyne (CH=CH)
 The electronic coniguration of
6C (ground state) 0
z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy =   
6C (excited state) z 1s 2s 2p 2p 2pxy =    
6C (hybridized state)  22
sp sp1s 2p 2pyz =    
Fig. (6.17) sp-hybridization to form a linear structur e536 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Ethyne is formed as a result 
of sp hybridization of carbon atoms 
and subsequent formation of s and p	
bonds. Each carbon atom undergoes 
sp-s overlap with one hydrogen atom 
and sp-sp overlap with other carbon 
atom. Each carbon atom is left with two 
unhybridized p orbitals perpendicular 
to the plane of sp hybrid orbitals. The 
two half illed p orbitals (on separate 
carbon atoms) are parallel to each 
other in one plane while the other two 
p orbitals are parallel to each other in 
another plane. The sideways p overlap 
between the p-orbitals in two planes 
results in the formation of two p bonds 
as shown in Fig.(6.18).
 Ethyne molecule contains one 
s and two p bonds between the two 
carbon atoms and each carbon atom 
is bonded with, one H atom through s 
bond. Actually, four electronic clouds of 
two p-bonds intermix and they surround the sigma bond in the shape of a drum.
6.4.6. Molecular Orbital Theory
 The molecular orbital approach considers the whole molecule as a single unit. It assumes that 
the atomic orbitals of the combining atoms overlap to form new orbitals  called molecular orbitals 
which are characteristic of the whole molecule. The molecular orb ital surrounds two or more nuclei 
of the bonded atoms. Two atomic orbitals, after overlapping, form two m olecular orbitals which 
difer in energy. One of them, having lower energy, is called bond ing molecular orbital while the 
other having higher energy is called anti-bonding molecular orb ital. 
Fig. (6.18) Formation of one sigma and two pi-bonds in C2H2 (ethyne)546 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The  bonding molecular orbital is symmetrical about the axis joining the nuclei of the bonded 
atoms (molecular axis). It is designated as sigma ( s) bonding molecular orbital while the antibonding 
molecular orbital, is called s*. The process of formation of molecular orbitals from 1s atomic orbitals 
of hydrogen is shown in Fig (6.19). 
 The  illing of electrons into the molecular orbitals takes place ac cording to the Aufbau principle, 
Pauli’s exclusion principle and Hund’s rule.The two electrons  (one from each hydrogen atom), thus 
ill the low energy s1s-orbital and have paired spin ( ↿⇂ ), while the high energy s*1s orbital remains 
empty.
Fig (6.19). Formation of bonding and anti-bonding molecu lar orbitals for 
hydrogen molecule (H2)
Animation 6.31: Molecular Orbital Theory
Source & Credit : andrew.cmu556 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 So  far, we have considered s and s orbital overlap for the form ation of molecular orbitals 
of hydrogen molecule. Other types of overlaps occurring between p a nd p atomic orbitals to form 
molecular orbitals are described below. There are three 2p atomic or bitals directed along the three 
perpendicular x, y and z coordinates. For the formation of molecul ar orbitals from p- orbitals, two 
cases arise:
(a)  Head on Approach
 Here, the p-orbitals of the two atoms approach along the same axis ( i.e. px axis) as shown in 
Fig. (6.20). 
 This combination of the atomic orbitals gives rise to s(2px) bonding and s* (2px) antibonding 
molecular orbitals. Both are symmetrical about the nuclear axis.
(b)  Sideways Approach
 When the axes of two p-orbitals (i.e py or pz orbitals) are parallel to each other, they interact 
to form molecular orbitals as shown in Fig.(6.21).
Fig. (6.20) Head on overlap of two p-orbitals566 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The bonding molecular orbitals p(2py) or p (2pz) have zero electron density on the nuclear axis 
(called the nodal plane). The electron density is uniformly distr ibuted above and below the nodal 
plane.
 On the other hand, anti-bonding molecular orbitals p* (2py) and p* (2pz) have the least electron 
density in the p inter-nuclear region. Since the 2p y and 2p z atomic orbitals are degenerate (having 
the same energy), the p - molecular orbitals i.e. p	(2py) and p	(2pz) are also degenerate. So,are also 
the p*(2py) and p*(2pz) molecular orbitals.
 Overall six molecular orbitals (three bonding and three anti-bon ding) are formed from two 
sets of 2p atomic orbitals. The bond formed as a result of linea r overlap is ó bond, while that 
formed as a result of sideways overlap is called a p (pi) bond. As there are three bonding molecular 
orbitals, the p-orbitals overlap can lead to the formation of at the m ost three bonds: one sigma and 
two p -bonds.
Relative Energies of the Molecular Orbitals
The relative energies of the molecular orbitals formed from 2s and  2p atomic orbitals in the case of 
homonuclear di-atomic molecules are shown in Fig. (6.22).
 The energies of the molecular orbitals are determined by spectroscop ic measurements.
The molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules such as O2, F2 and their positive and negative ions can 
be arranged in the following-increasing order of energy (Fig 6.22a).Fig. (6.21) Sideways overlap of two p-orbitals576 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s s s s sppp ps** * *
xyz yz x 1s < 1s < 2s < 2s < 2p < 2p = 2p < 2p = 2p < 2p
 The  diatomic molecules, such as N2 and other -lighter molecules like B2, C2 show slightly 
diferent energy order. See Fig. (6.22 b):
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ss s s p p s p p s* * ***<< < = < < = <zzx y z x 1s< 1 2s 2s 2p 2p 2p 2p 2p 2ps
Reason
 It has been observed that in case of B2, C2 and N2 ,s2px is higher in energy than p2py=p2px. 
MOs. This reversal is due to mixing of 2s and 2px atomic orbitals. 
 Actually, the energy diference of 2s and 2p atomic orbitals is small. There is a possibility of 
mixing of these orbitals (i.e. hybridization of A.O.) as a r esult of which s2s and s*2s MOs do not 
retain pure s-character. Similarly, s2px and s*2px MOs do not have pure p-character. All the four 
MOs acquire sp-character. Due to this mixing, their energies ch ange’in such a way that MOs s2s and 
s*2s become more stable and are lowered in energy MOs as s2px and s*2px become less stable and 
are raised in energy. Since, pp-orbitals are not involved in mixing, so energy of p2py=p2pz remains 
unchanged. s	2px is raised to such an extend that it becomes higher in energy than p-bondings.
Fig (6.22) (a) Molecular orbital energy diagram for O2, F2 and their positive and negative ions 
(b) Molecular orbital energy diagram.for Li2, Be2, B2 and N2.586 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Anyhow, O2 and F2  do not do so. The re ason is high energy diference of their 2s and  2p 
i.e. 1595 and 2078 k Jmol-1, for O2 and F2 , respectively. These values are 554kJmol-1 for boron, 
846kJmol-1 for carbon, and 1195kJmol-1 for nitrogen. These energy diferences have been calculated 
by spectroscopic techniques.
Bond Order
 The  number of bonds formed between two atoms after the atomic orbitals overlap, is called 
the bond order and is taken as half of the diference between the number  of bonding electrons and 
anti-bonding electrons. The number of bonds formed between H-atoms in  hydrogen molecule may 
be calculated as follows:
Number of electrons in the bonding orbitals   = 2
Number of electrons in the anti-bonding orbitals  = 0
Bond order         = −20
2  = 1
 It is a common practice that only MOs formed from valence orbital  are considered in bond 
order calculations.
Molecular Orbital Structures of Some Diatomic Molecules
(i)  Helium, He2
 The  electronic coniguration of He is 1s2. The 1s orbitals of He-atoms combine to form one 
bonding s (1s) and one anti-bonding s* (1s) orbitals as shown in Fig (6.23). 
 Each He-atom contributes two electrons. Two electrons enter bonding molecu lar orbital s	(ls) 
and the remaining two go to antibonding s* (Is) molecular orbital.
The bond order for He2 is zero i.e. −20
2 picture of He2 molecule is not formed.596 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(ii)  Nitrogen, N2
 The molecular orbital structure of N2 molecule is shown in Fig (6.24). Electronic coniguration 
of N2 molecule is
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ss s s p p s p p s* * ** *<< < = < <2 22 2 2 2 2
z xyz x 1s < 1s 2s 2s 2p 2p 2p < 2p = 2p 2py
 From  the electronic coniguration of N2, it is clear that six electrons enter into three outermost 
bonding orbitals while no electrons enter into anti-bonding orbitals .
Thus, the bond order in N2 molecule is −=60 6
22=3, which corresponds 
to the triple bond consisting of one sigma and two p bonds. The bond dissociation energy of N2 is 
very high, i.e. 941kJmol-1.
Fig Fig. (6.23) Hypothetical orbital
picture of He2 molecule.606 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(iii)  Oxygen, 02
 The formation of molecular orbitals in oxygen molecule is shown in  Fig. (6.25). The electronic 
coniguration of O2 is 
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ss s s s p p p p s* * ***<< < <21 2 22 2 2 1
x y z y zz x 1s < 1s 2s 2s 2p < 2p = 2p < 2p = 2p 2p
 The bond order in O2, is −62
2  =2, which corresponds to a double bond.
 This is  consistent  with  the  large  bond  energy of 496kJ m ol-1 of oxygen molecule. Fig(6.25) 
shows that the illing of molecular orbitals leaves two unpaired electr ons in each of the p*(2py) and 
p*(2pz) orbitals. Thus, the | electronic coniguration of the molecular orb itals accounts  admirably 
for the paramagnetic properties of oxygen. This is one of the greatest successes of the molecular 
orbital theory. Liquid O2 is attracted towards the magnet. 
Fig. (6.24) Molecular orbitals picture of N2 molecule.616 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Anyhow, when two more electrons are given to O2, it becomes O22-. The paragmanetism 
vanishes. Similarly, in O22+ the unpaired electrons are removed and paragmagnetic property is no 
more there. Bond order of O22- are also diferent from O2 and are one and three, respectively. 
    Similarly, M.O.T justiies that F2 has bond order of one and Ne does not make a bond with Ne.
Fig. (6.25) Molecular orbitals in 0, molecule.626 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.5  BOND ENERGY, BOND LENGTH AND DIPOLE MOMEN
6.5.1 Bond Energy (bond enthalpy)
 When a bond is formed between two atoms, energy is released. The sa me amount of energy 
is absorbed when the bond is broken to form neutral atoms. So, the bond energy is the average 
amount of energy required to break all bonds of a particular typ e in one mole of the substance.  It is 
determined experimentally, by measuring the heat involved in a chemi cal reaction. It is also called 
bond enthalpy, as it is a measure of enthalpy change at 298 K. The enthalpy change in splitting a 
molecule into its component atoms is called, enthalpy of atomization.
 The bond energy is given in k j mol-1 which is the energy required to break an Avogadro’s 
number (6.02 x 1023) of bonds. It is also released when an Avogadro’s number of b onds are formed. 
Table (6.5).
Animation 6.32: Bond Energy (bond enthalpy)
Source & Credit : packbackbooks636 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
BondBond
energy
(kJmol-1)BondBond
energy
(kJmol-1)BondBond
energy
(kJmol-1)BondBond
energy
(kJmol-1)
C-C 348 H-H 436 O-O 146 Si-H 323
C=C 614 H-F 567 O=O 495 Si-Si 226
C ≡ C 839 H-Cl 431 O-H 463 Si-C 301
C-H 413 H-Br 366 O-F 190 Si-O 368
C-N 293 H-I 299 O-Cl 203 F-H 155
C=N 615 N-N 163 O-I 234 Cl-F 253
C≡ N 891 N=N 418 S-S 266 Cl-Cl 242
C-O 358 N≡ N 941 S=S 418 Br-F 237
C=O 799 N-H 391 S=O 523 Br-Cl 218
C≡O 1072 N-O 201 S-H 339 Br-Br 193
C-F 485 N-F 272 S-F 327 I-Cl 208
C-Cl 328 N-Cl 200 S-Cl 253 I-Br 175
C-Br 276 N-Br 243 S-Br 218 I-I 151
C-I 240
C-S 259
 It may be noted that energies of multiple bonds are greater than those of single bonds. But 
a double bond is not twice as a strong as a single bond or a tri ple bond is not thrice as strong as 
a single bond. It means that s- bond is stronger than a p-bond. Similarly, a polar covalent bond is 
stronger than a non-polar covalent bond.Table (6.5) Average bond enthalpies of some importa nt bonds (kjmol-1).
Animation 6.33: BOND ENERGY, BOND LENGTH 
AND DIPOLE MOMENT
Source & Credit : chem.utah646 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.5.2 Ionic Character and Bond Energy
  Bond energy is a measure of the strength of a bond. The strength of a bond depends upon 
the following factors.
 (i) Electronegativity diference of bonded atoms  (ii) Sizes of the atom s (iii)Bond length Let 
us consider, irst the part played by electronegativity diference. Look at the bond energies of H-X 
type of compounds, where X=F, Cl, Br, I, Table (6.6).This d ata show that electrons are not equally 
shared between the bonded atoms i.e. HX. As halogen atom is more electr onegative, the bonded 
pair is more attracted towards X atom and thereby polarity develops.  This gives rise to additional 
attractive force for binding. 
 From the diference between experimental bond energies and those calcula ted by assuming 
equal sharing, it is possible to estimate relative electronegativities. Th e comparison of these values 
shows that the discrepancy is the greatest for HF and the least for H I, Table (6.9).
 Let us calculate, the increase in the strength of H-Cl bond,due to the ionic character present 
in it.The H-H bond energy is 436 k J mol-1
  
It  means 436 k J   of heat is required to break the Avogadro’s number of H2 molecules into individual 
atoms. Thus, bond energy per bond is 72.42 x 10-23kJ. This is obtained by dividing 436 by 6.02 x 1023. 
As the bonding electron pair is equally shared between the two H atom s, we can assume that each 
bonded H-atom contributes half of the bond energy i.e., 36.21x10-23kJ.
Similarly, the bond energy for Cl2 is 240 kJ mol-1. Therefore, each Cl-atom should contribute 19.93 
x 10-23 kJ to any bond, where sharing of an 
electron pair is equal.
Animation 6.34: Ionic Character and Bond Energy
Source & Credit : av8n→∆-1
2 H+H H H=-436kJmol656 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Let  us, now consider, the bond in HCl. This bond is polar,  but we consider the electron pair to be 
equally shared. On adding up the bond energy contributions of H-atom and Cl-atom, we expect the 
bond energy of H-Cl to be 56.14 x 10-23kJ per molecule which is the sum of 36.21xl0-23kJ and 19.93x10-
23kJ. For Avogadro’s number of HCl molecules, the calculated bond energy is 337.96 kJmol-1 which 
is obtained by multiplying 56.14 x 10 -23 with 6.02 x 10-23 The experimentally found bond energy 
for HCl is 431 kJmol-1.The observed bond energy is signiicantly greater than the calcula ted value 
and that means a more stable H-Cl bond. This  stability is due to the ionic character present in the 
molecule.The decreasing polarity from HF to HI shows a trend towar d equal sharing of electrons 
which is consistent with decreasing electronegativity from F to I.
 The bonds with higher bond energy values have shorter bond lengths . The bond energies of 
C to C bonds being in the order C ≡ C >C=C>C-C. Their bond lengths are in the reverse order i.e. C 
-C > C=C > C ≡ C.
6.5.3 Bond Length
 The distance between the nuclei of two atoms forming a covalent bond is called the bond 
length. The bond lengths are experimentally determined by physica l techniques. The techniques 
may be electron difraction, X-ray difraction or spectral studies.
The covalent bond length between two atoms is often but not always indepen dent of the nature of 
the molecules. For instance, in most of the aliphatic hydrocarbon s, the C-C bond length is very close 
to 154 pm. The C-C bond length is  also found to be the same in diamond.
 The covalent radii for diferent elements are almost  additive in natur e. The single bond 
covalent radius of carbon is 77 pm which is half of the C-C bond length (154 pm). Similarly, the 
covalent radius of Cl is 99 pm i.e. one half of the Cl-Cl bond length (198 pm). So the bond length of 
C-Cl bond will be 77 + 99= 176 pm. Some selected bond lengths  are given in Table (6.7).Bond Bond energies (kJmol-1)
X-XX=F X=Cl X=Br X=I
155 242 193 151
H-X
(calculated)293 336 311 291
H-X
(observed)567 431 366 299
diference 274 95 55 8Table (6.6) Comparison of experimental
and theoretical bond energies666 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 
Compound Hybridization Bond Bond length
(pm)
BF3
(Boron triluoride)sp2B-F 130
BCl3
(Boron triluoride)sp2B-Cl 175
SiH4
(Monosilane)sp3Si-H 148
SiF4
(silicon tetraluoride)sp3Si-F 155
C2H6
(Ethene)sp3C-C 154
C2H4
(Ethene)sp2C=C 133
C2H2
(Ethene)sp C ≡ C 120
(CH3)2  C=O
(Acetone)sp2C=O 122Table (6.7) Some selected bond lengths alongwith 
and hybridization of central atom.
Animation 6.35: Bond Length
Source & Credit : ch.ic.ac676 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 With  an increase in electronegativity diference between the bonded atoms,  the bond 
becomes shortened. For example, Si-F bond length in SiF4 is found to be 154-159 pm, whereas the 
addition of their covalent radii (Si=117 pm and F=64 pm) gi ve Si-F bond length to be equal to 181 
pm, Table (6.7). The calculated values are almost always hig her due to electronegativity diferences. 
The ionic character results in shortening of the bond length due to force of attraction between the 
polar ends.
 Moreover, hybridization scheme involved, also explains the shorten ing of bonds due to the 
predominant participation of s-orbitals. Since, the 2s-orbital of  carbon has smaller mean radius 
than the 2p-orbitals, it would be expected that greater the s character in the hybrid orbitals used, 
the shorter will be the bond distance. Thus, the C-C bond length s are 154,133 and 120 pm for 
ethane, ethene and ethyne, respectively where s orbital contribution incr eases from sp3 to sp. 
Further, p-bonding also reduces the internucleft bond distance.
 The  bond length increases, as we move from top to bottom in group IV -A of the periodic table. 
Thus, Si-Si bond length is more than C-C bond length in gr oup IV-A and P-P bond length is much 
more than N-N bond length in group V-A. As the atomic radii in crease in a group (N to P or C to Si), 
the efect of the efective nuclear charge decreases on electrons. As a resul t the bond length will 
increase. In the periodic table, shortening of bond lengths occurs from left to right in, a period. This 
can be attributed to the pull by nuclear charge with the same valu e of principal quantum number. 
Therefore, C-C bond length is greater than N-N bond length.
6.5.4 Dipole Moment
 In heteronuclear molecules, e.g. HCl where the bonded atoms are of di ferent elements, 
the molecule becomes polar due to the electronegativity diference. Partial pos itive and negative 
charges become separated on the bonded atoms. The se paration of th ese charges on the molecule 
is called a dipole and the molecule is said to have a dipole moment.
 The dipole  moment is a vector quantity, which has a magnitude as well as a direction. 
Fig . (6.26) illustrates the dipole and its vecrtor representation. The  dipole moment (m) is be de -
ined as the product of the electric charge (q) and the distance between  the positive and negative 
centres (r):
  m	= q x r686 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 The dipole moments of simple heteronuclear diatomic molecules like HF, HCl, HBr. HI, CO, 
NO, etc. are directed from electropositive ends to electronegative ends.
 The dipole moments are measured in Debye (D) units. Let us consider  a hypothetical molecule 
(A*—B-), or a unit negative charge separated from a unit positive charge b y distance r = 100 pm (1 
Å)The dipole moment of such a molecule can be calculated by m ultiplying the distance 100pm to 
charge of one electron or proton is 1.6 orx10-19C m=(1.6022x10-19C)x(100x10-12m) = 1.6022x10-29 mC
Fig. (6.26) Dipole moment and its vector representati on
Animation6.36: Dipole Moment
Source & Credit : chemwiki.ucdavis696 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 Another unit of dipole moment is Debye. The 
equivalence of Debye and  mC is 1 D = 3.336x10-30mC. So, 
the dipole moment of the, above system in Debye units is
 = −
−29
301.6022 x 10 mC
3.336x 10 mC  = 4.8 D
 The dipole moments of some substances in Debye units are 
given in Table (6.8). If the molecule is polyatomic and contains  two 
or more dipoles, then the net dipole moment is the resultant of the 
vector addition of the individual bond moments. Examples of CO2 
and H2O are shown in Fig (6.26).
6.5.5 Dipole Moments and Molecular Structure
Dipole moment provides two types of information about the molecular structu re:
 (i) Percentage ionic character of a bond
 (ii) Angles between the bonds or the geometry of moleculesCompound Dipole moment
(D)
H20.00
HCl 1.03
HBr 0.78
HI 0.38
H2O 1.85
H2S 0.95
NH31.49
SO21.61
CO20.00
CO 0.12
NO 0.16
H2O22.20
CH40.00
CH3F 1.81
CH3Cl 1.45
CH3Br 1.85
CH3l 1.35
C2H5OH 1.69Table (6.8) Dipole moments of 
some substances in Debyes
Fig (6.26) Vector addition of bond moments in
(a) linear C02 molecule and (b) angular H20 molecular706 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(1)  Percentage Ionic Character
 From the experimentally determined dipole moments, the percentage ionic character in a 
bond can be calculated. For this purpose, we should know the actu al dipole moment mobs of the 
molecule and actual bond, length. The dipole moment of 100% ionic  compound is represented as 
mionic.
    %age of ionic character = m
mobs
ionicx100
Example 1:
 The observed dipole moment of HF is 1.90 D. Find the percentage ioni c character in H-F bond. 
The distance between the charges is 0.917 x 10-10 m. 
(Unit positive charge= 1.6022 x 10-19 C).
Solution:
 Let us suppose that HF molecules is 100% ionic. It means that H has full positive charge and 
F has full negative charge.
Animation 6.37: Dipole Moments and Molecular Struct ure
Source & Credit : uni-marburg716 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
To calculate its dipole moment multiply the bond length with full charge of electron or proton i.e. 
1.6022 x 10-19 C. This dipole moment is called
mionic.
  So,   mionic   =qxr
      =(1.6022x10-19C)(0.917x10-10m)
      =1.469x10-29 mC
  Scince 1 D   =3.336x10-30  mC
  So,    = m−
−=29
c
ionic 30
c1.469x10 m
3.336x10 m =   4.4D
 
 The actual dipole moment is given as it is observed.
  mobserved=1.90  D
 %ionic character= m
mobserved 
ionicx 100
    = 1.90 Dx 100
4.4D   =43.2% Answer
 Hence, 43% of HF bond is ionic in nature and 57% covalent. Th e bond is predominantly covalent.
(ii)  Bond Angles or the Geometry of Molecules
 We can understand this aspect by taking some important exampl es.
 The dipole moment of water is 1.85 D which ruled out its linear structure. The calculations 
show that water has an angular structure with a bond angle 10 4.5° between the two O-H bonds. 
A linear H2O molecule (H-O-H) would have zero dipole 
moment.
 Similarly, the triatomic molecules H2S or SO2 etc. are 
also bent like H2O.726 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 CO  has a dipole moment while CO2 does not have any. The reason is that CO2 has a linear 
structure, where the dipoles being equal and opposite, cancel out each  other’s efect. Similarly, CS2 
has zero dipole moment.
 Symmetrical triangular planar molecules of BF3, AlCl3 and perfectly tetrahedral molecules like 
CH4, SiH4, CCl4 also have zero dipole moments. This is all due to the cancellation  of individual bond 
moments.736 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
6.6  THE EFFECT OF BONDING ON THE PROPERTIES OF 
COMPOUNDS
 The properties of substances are characterized by the types of bond ing present in them. 
Here, we shall consider the efects of the type of bond on physical an d chemical properties of 
compounds.
(1)  Solubility
(a )  Solubility of Ionic Compounds
 Mostly, ionic compounds are soluble in water but insoluble in n on-aqueous solvents. When 
a crystal of an ionic substance is placed in water, the polar  water molecules detach the cations 
and anions from the crystal lattice by their electrostatic attraction.  Thus, the ions are freed from 
the crystal lattice by hydration. This happens when the hyd ration energy is greater than the lattice 
energy and the ions are freed from their positions in the crystal. M any ionic compounds do not 
dissolve in water, as the attraction of water molecules cannot overcome the attraction between 
the ions. For the same reason, non-polar solvents like benzene and hex ane do not dissolve, ionic 
compounds.
(b)  Solubility of Covalent Compounds
In general, covalent compounds dissolve easily in non-polar organ ic solvent (benzene, ether, etc.)
 
 Here, the  attractive forces of solvent molecules are enough for overcoming th e intermolecular 
forces of attraction. Mostly, covalent compounds are insoluble in water . However, some of them 
dissolve in water due to hydrogen bonding.746 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
 
(2)  Isomerism
(a)  Non-Directional Nature of Ionic Bonds
The ionic compounds involve electrostatic lines of forces between oppositel y charged ions. 
Therefore, such bonds are non-rigid and non-directional. Becau se of this, ionic compounds do not 
exhibit the phenomenon of isomerism.
(b)  Directional Nature of Covalent Bonds
 Covalent compounds are rigid and directional. This leads to the possibility of a variety of 
isomerism. For example, the compounds, C2H6O, shows structural isomerism.
 
      
       
       
        
H H  
O  
H C C  H 
 H H  
H  
O  H 
 C  C H
  
H H  H 
 Dimethyl ether      Ethanol
Animation 6.38: THE EFFECT OF BONDING ON THE 
PROPERTIES OF COMPOUNDS
Source & Credit : ausetute756 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(3)  Reaction Kinetics:
(a)  Speed of Reaction of Ionic Compounds
The ionic compounds exist in the form of ions in an aqueous solu tion. The chemical reaction 
between ions occur rapidly.
 For example, addition of silver nitrate solution to sodium chloride s olution produces a white 
precipitate of silver chloride instantaneously. The reaction is ra pid because on mixing the solutions, 
no bonds have to be broken, only a new bond is formed. The ionic com pounds have already been 
broken while forming their aqueous solutions.
(b)  Speed of Reactions of Covalent Compounds
 Since, there is no strong electrical force to speed up a chemical r eaction (like in ionic reaction), 
the covalent bonds are generally much slower to react as they involve bond breaking and making 
of bonds. The molecules undergo a chemical change as a whole. Covalent bonds react in a variety 
of ways and their reactivity depends upon the way a reaction proceeds  and the kind of a reaction.766 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1. Atoms  combine together due to their inherent tendency to attain the nearest n oble gas electronic      
conigurations and the formation of a chemical bond always resul ts in a decrease of energy.
2. The  size of an atom is expressed in terms of atomic radius, ioni c radius and covalent radius and 
van der Waals radius.
3. It is  necessary to understand thermodynamic properties of elements.  The minimum amount 
of energy required to remove an electron from an atom in gaseous state is  called ionization 
energy. It depends upon the atomic size, nuclear charge and shiel ding efect of electrons. The 
electron ainity of an atom is the energy given out when an electron is a dded to a gaseous atom. 
The tendency of an atom to attract a shared pair of electrons to itself i s called electronegativity. 
Fluorine, is the most electronegative atom and it has arbitrarily been  given a value of 4.0.
4. The  ionic bonds are formed by transfer of electron from one atom to an other. Covalent bonds 
are formed by mutual sharing of electrons between combining atoms. After the formation of 
a coordinate covalent bond, there is no distinction between a covalent b ond and a coordinate 
covalent bond.
5. A  polar covalent bond is formed when atoms having diferent electronega tivity values mutually 
share their electrons. Due to polarity, bonds become shorter and stronger and dipole moment 
may develop.
6. According  to valence bond theory, the atomic orbitals overlap to form bonds but the individual 
character of the atomic orbitals are retained. The greater the overlap, the stronger will be the 
bond formed.
7. The  VSEPR theory gives information about the general shapes and b ond angles of molecules. It 
is based upon repulsion between bonding and lone pairs of electrons , which tend to remain at 
maximum distance apart so that interaction between them is minimum . The concept provides 
an alternate way to explain various geometrical shapes of molecules.
8. The  geometrical shapes and bond angles are better explained by di ferent hybridization schemes, 
where diferent atomic orbitals are mixed to form hybrid orbitals.
9. According  to molecular orbital theory, atomic orbitals overlap to for m molecular orbitals, n atomic 
orbitals combine to form n molecular orbitals. Half of them are bon ding molecular orbitals and 
half antibonding molecular orbitals. In this combination, th e individual atomic orbital character 
is lost in order to form an entirely new orbital that belongs to the whol e molecule. The theory 
successfully explains bond order and paramagnetic property of  O2.
10. The  bond energy in deined as the average amount of energy required to break all bonds 
of a particular type in one mole of the substance. It is a measure of the strength of the bond. 
Stronger the dipole of a bond, greater will be the bond energy.776 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
11.The  distance between the nuclei of two atoms forming a covalent b ond is called bond length. In 
general, it is the sum of the covaleht radii of the combined atoms.
12. The dipole moment may be deined as the product of electric charg e (q) and the distance (r) 
between the two  oppositely charged centres. It is a vector quantity as it has magnitude and 
direction. It plays a major role, in determining the % age ionic  character of a covalent bond and 
the shapes of molecules. It has magnitude and direction.
13. Properties of substances are characterized by the type of bonds  present in them.
EXERCISE
Q.1  Select the correct statement
(i)   An ionic compound A+B- is most likely to be formed when
(a)  the ionization energy of A is high and electron ainity of B is low.
(b)  the ionization energy of A is low and electron ainity of B is  high.
(c)  both the ionization energy of A andelectron ainity of B are hig h.
(d)  both the ionization energy of A and electron ainity of B are low .
(ii)   The number of bonds in nitrogen molecule is
(a)  one ó and one p
(b)  one ó and two p
(c)  three sigma only
(d)  two ó and one p
(iii)   Which of the following statement is not correct regarding b onding molecular   
  orbitals?
(a)  Bonding molecular orbitals possess less energy than atomic orbitals from which 
they are formed.
(b)  Bonding molecular orbitals have low electron density between th e two nuclei.
(c)  Every electron in the bonding molecular orbitals contributes to th e attraction 
between atoms.
(d)  Bonding molecular orbitals are formed when the electron waves undergo 
constructive interference.
(iv)   Which of the following molecules has zero dipole moment?
(a) NH3  (b) CHCl3   (c)H2O   (d) BF3
(v)  Which of the hydrogen halides has the highest percentage of i onic character?
(a) HCl   (b) HBr   (c)HF    (d)Hl786 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
(vi)  Which of the following species has unpaired electrons in antibonding molecular  
orbitals.
(a) 022+  (b) N22-   (c) B2    (d) F2
Q.2  Fill in the blanks
(i)  The tendency of  atoms to attain maximum ________ of electron s in the valence shell is 
called completion of octet.
(ii)  The geometrical shape of SiCl4 and PCl3 can be explained on the basis of__________and________
hybridizations.
(iii)  The VSEPR theory stands for__________________ .
(iv)  For N2 molecule, the energy of ó (2p)x orbital is________________  than p(2py) orbital.
(v)  The  paramagnetic property of O2 is well explained on the basis of MO theory in terms 
of the presence of_________________ electrons in two MO orbitals.
(vi)  The values of dipole moment for CS2 is __________while for SO2 is __________
(vii) The bond order of N2 is________________ while that of Ne2 is _______________ .
Q.3  Classify the statements as true or false. Explain with reas ons.
(i)  The core of an atom is the atom minus its valence shell.
(ii)  The molecules of nitrogen (N ≡ N) and acetylene (HC ≡ CH) are not isoelectronic.
(iii)  There are four coordinate covalent bonds in NH4+ ion.
(iv)  A ó-bond is stronger than a p-bond and the electrons of s-bond are more difused than  
          p-bond.
(v)  The bond energy of heteroatomic diatomic molecules increases with the decrease in the 
electronegativities of the bonded atoms.
(vi)  With increase in bond order, bond length decreases and bon d strength increases.
(vii)  The  irst ionization energies of the elements rise steadily with  the increasing atomic 
number from top to bottom ina group.
(viii)  A double bond is stronger than a single bond and a tr iple bond is weaker than a double bond.
(ix)  The  bonds formed between the elements having electronegativity difer ence more than 
1.7 are said to be covalent in nature.
(x)  The re pulsive force between the two bonding pairs is less tha n that between the two 
lone pairs.
(xi)  The  number of covalent bonds an atom can form is related to the number of unpaired 
electrons it has.
(xii)  The  rules which govern the illing of electrons into the atomi c orbitals also govern illing 
of electrons into the molecular orbitals.796 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Q.4  What  is a chemical bond? Discuss the formation of ionic  and covalent bonds. How does the 
electronegativity diferences diferentiate between ionic and covalent bond?
Q.5
(a)  Deine  ionization energy and electron ainity. How these quantities  change in the 
periodic table. What factors are responsible for their variation?
(b)  Explain, what do you understand by the term electronegativity?  Discuss its variations in  
  the periodic table. How does it afect the bond strengths?
Q.6  Write the Lewis structures for the following compounds:
(i)HCN   (ii)CCl4   (iii) CS2   (iv) H3N → AlF3
(v)NH4OH   (vii)H2SO4   (vii)H3PO4   (viii) K2Cr2O7
(ix)N2O5   (x) Ag(NH3)2NO3
Q.7
(a)  Explain  qualitatively the valence bond theory. How does it dif er from molecular 
orbital theory?
(b)  How  the bonding in the following molecules can be explain ed with respect to 
valence bond theory? Cl2, O2, N2, HF, H2S.
Q.8 Explain VSEPR theory. Discuss  the structures of CH4, NH3, H2O, BeCl2, BF3,S02, SO3 with reference 
to this theory.
Q.9  The molecules NF3 andBF3 all have molecular formulae of the type XF3. But they have diferent 
structural formulas. Keeping in view VSEPR theory sketch the shap e of eachtnolecule and explain 
the origin of difering in shapes. 
Q.10 The species NH2-, NH3, NH4+ have bond angles of 105°, 107.5° and109.50 respectively. Justify 
these values by drawing their structures.
Q.11
(a)  Explain  atomic orbital hybridization with reference to sp3, sp2 and sp modes 
of hybridizations for PH3, C2H4 and C2H2. Discuss geometries of CCl4, PCl3, and H2S by 
hybridization of central atoms.
(b)  The  linear geometry of BeCl2 suggests that central Be atom is sp-hybridized. What 
type of hybridization a central atom undergoes, when the atoms bonded  to it are located 
at the corners of (a) an equilateral triangle (b) a regular tetrahedron and (c) triangular 
bipyramide?806 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Q.12
(a)  Give  the basis .of the molecular orbital theory and discuss  the molecular orbital 
conigurations of the following molecules?
(i)He2   (ii)N2   (iii) O2   (iv)O22+  (v)O22-
(b)  How  does molecular orbital theory explain the paramagnetic c haracter of O2,O22+ 
and O22- species ?
Q.13 
a)  Sketch the molecular orbital pictures of
(i) p(2px) and p*(2px)  (ii) O2, O22+ ,O22- (iii) He2  and Ne2
b)  Sketch the hybrid orbitals of the species, PCI3, SiCl4 and NH4+
Q.14  
(a)  Deine bond energy. Explain the various parameters which determ ine its strength.
(b)  How do you compare the bond strengths of
(i) Polar and non-polar molecules  (ii) s-and p-bonds?
(c)  Calculate the bond energy of H-Br. The bond energy of H-H i s 436  kJmol-1 and that of 
Br- Br is 193 kJmol-1.
(Ans : 314.5kJmol-1)
Q.15 
(a)  Deine  dipole moment. Give its various units. Find relationship between Debye and mc. 
How does it help to ind out the shapes of molecules?
(b)  The bond length of H-Br is 1.4 x10-10m. Its observed dipole moment is 0.79D. Find the 
percentage ionic character of the bond. Unit positive charge = 1.60 22 x 10-19C and 1D = 3.336 
x 10-30 mc.  
(Ans: 11.7%)
Q.16  PF3 is a polar molecule with dipole moment 1.02 D and thus the P-F bond is polar. Si, is in the 
proximity of P in the periodic table. It is expected that Si-F bon d would also be polar, but SiF4 has 
no dipole moment. Explain it?816 CHEMICAL BONDING eLearn.Punjab
Q.17  Which of the following molecules will be polar or non-pola r, sketch the structures and justify 
your answer.
(i) CCl4  (ii) SO3 (iii)NF3 (iv)SO2
Q.18  Explain the following with reasons:
(i)  Bond distance is the compromise distance between two atoms.
(ii)  The  distinction between a coordinate covalent bond and a covalen t bond vanishes after 
bond formation in NH4+, H3O+ and CH3NH3+ .
(iii)  The  bond angles of H2O and NH3 are not 109.5° like that of CH4. Although, O- and 
N-atoms are sp3 hybridized.
(vi)  p-bonds are more difused than s-bonds.
(v)  The abnormality of bond length and bond strength in HI i s less prominent than that of 
HCl.
(vi)  The dipole moments of CO2, and CS2 are zero, but. that of SO21.61D.
(vii)  The  melting points, boiling points, heat of vaporizations a nd heat of sublimations of 
electrovalent compounds are higher as compared with those of covalent com pounds.