CHAPTER
2EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES
 IN CHEMISTRY
Animation 2.1 :Basic Concepts
Source & Credit: chem.ucsb22.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Analytical chemistry is the science of chemical characte rization . A complete chemical 
characterization of a compound must include both qualitative and q uantitative analyses.In qualitative 
analysis, the chemist is concerned with the detection or identiication of the elements present in a 
compound. Whereas in quantitative analysis, the relative amounts of the elements are determined. 
A complete quantitative determination generally consists of four major steps (i) Obtaining a sample 
for analysis (ii) Separation of the desired constituent (iii) Meas urement, and calculation of results (iv) 
Drawing conclusion from the analysis. In this chapter, we wil l restrict ourselves to only important 
techniques of separation. The students will practice these techni ques during their laboratory work 
whereas their theoretical treatment is given here.
2.1  FILTRATION
The process of iltration is used to separate insoluble particles from  liquids. It can be performed with several 
types of ilter media. Nature of the precipitate and other factors di ctate which ilter medium must be used. The 
most convenient ways of iltration are either through a ilter paper or thr ough a ilter crucible.
Animation 2.2: Filtration Assembly
Source & Credit:eLearn.punajb32.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.1.1  Filtration Through Filter Paper
Filtration  by a glass funnel and ilter paper is usually a  slow process. As the mixture is poured onto 
the ilter paper, the solvent (water) passes through leaving behind the s uspended particles on the 
ilter paper. Filter papers are available in a variety of porosites ( pore sizes) . Which pore size is to be 
used, depends upon the size of particles in the precipitate. The ilter  paper should be large enough 
so that it is one-fourth to one-half full of precipitate at the end of il tration. The funnel should, in 
turn, be large enough for its rim to extend 1 to 2 cm above the top circ umference of the paper. If 
the process of iltration is to run smoothly, the stem of the funnel shoul d remain continuously full 
of liquid as long as there is liquid in the conical portion.
Animation 2.3: iltration
Source & Credit:shermanqmatrangas42.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 The stem of the funnel should be several inches long so that it can extend a few centimeters down 
into the receiving beaker, and the tip should touch the side of the beaker . In this way, the iltrate 
runs down the side of beaker without splashing. A complete ilter pa per assembly is shown in 
Fig(2.1).
Folding of Filter Paper
The folding of ilter paper is important and the following points s hould be kept in mind. The paper 
should be folded twice. The irst fold should be along the diameter of  the paper.The second fold 
should be such that edges do not quite match. 
The paper should be opened on the slightly larger section. This provides a cone with three fold 
thickness halfway around and one thickness the other halfway 
around, and an apex angle very slightly greater than 60 degrees.
The paper may then be inserted into 60 degree funnel, moistened 
with water and irmly pressed down. The iltering operation could 
be very time consuming if it were not aided by a gentle suction as 
liquid passes through the stem. This suction cannot develop unless 
the paper its tightly all around its upper circumference.
Fluted Filter Paper
The rate of iltration through conical funnel can be considerably increased using a Fluted Filter 
Paper.  For preparation of such a paper ordinary ilter paper is folded  in such a way that a fan like 
arrangement with alternate elevations and depressions at various folds is obtained Fig (2.2).
Fig. (2.2) Fluted ilter paper
Fig. (2.1)Filtration assembly52.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.1.2 Filtration Through Filter Crucibles
Another convenient way to ilter a precipitate is by suction through a c rucible. Two types of crucibles 
are generally used.
Gooch Crucible
It is made of porcelain having a perforated bottom which is covered w ith paper pulp or a ilter 
paper cut to its size Fig (2.3 a). Quick iltration can be done by placing the Gooch crucible in a 
suction iltering apparatus. It is useful for the iltration of prec ipitates, which need to be ignited at 
high temperature. If its perforations are covered with asbestos mat then it may be used to ilter 
solutions that react with paper e.g. concentrated HCl and KMnO4 solutions.
Sintered glass crucible
Sintered glass crucible is a glass crucible with a porous g lass disc sealed into the bottom. It is very 
convenient to use because no preparation is needed as with the Gooch cruci ble Fig (2.3b)
2.2 CRYSTALLIZATION
Crystallization is the removal of a solid from solution by increas ing its concentration above the 
saturation point in such a manner that the excess solid separates ou t in the form of crystals.
Fig. (2.3a) Gooch Crucible     Fig. (2.3b) Sintered
with iltering apparatus    glass Crucible62.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
The preparation of a chemical compound usually afords a crud e product and there is a need to 
purify it by crystallization from a suitable solvent. The basi c principle of crystallization is the fact 
that the solute should be soluble in a suitable solvent at high temperatu re and the excess amount 
of the solute is thrown out as crystals when it is cooled. The proces s of crystallization involves the 
following steps.
Animation 2.4: crystilization
Source & Credit: evilforalltime72.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.2.1  Choice of a Solvent
The solvent is chosen on hit and trial basis and it is necessary  to try a number of solvents before 
arriving at a conclusion. An ideal solvent should have the followi ng features.
i. It should dissolve a large amount of the substance at its boilin g point and only a small amount  
at the room temperature.
ii. It should not react chemically with the solute.
iii.  It should either not dissolve the impurities or the impuriti es should not crystallize from it 
along with the solute.
iv. On cooling it should deposit well-formed crystals of the pure c ompound.
v. It should be inexpensive.
vi. It should be safe to use and should be easily removable.
The solvents which are mostly used for crystallization are, water, rectiied spirit (95% ethanol), 
absolute ethanol, diethyl ether, acetone, chloroform, carbon tetrachlorid e, acetic acid and petroleum 
ether. If none of the solvents is found suitable for crystallization,  a combination of two or more 
miscible solvents may be employed. If the solvent is inlammable then precaution should be taken 
while heating the solution so that it does not catch ire. In such cas es, water bath is used for heating 
purpose.
2.2.2  Preparation of the Saturated Solution
After selecting a suitable solvent, the substance is then dissolved in a minimum amount of solvent 
and is heated directly or on a water bath with constant stirring. Add more solvent to the boiling 
solution if necessary until all the solute has dissolved.
2.2.3  Filtration
The insoluble impurities in the saturated solution are then removed by iltering the hot saturated 
s olution, through a normal or a luted ilter paper. This avoids th e premature crystallization of the 
solute on the ilter paper or in the funnel stem. If necessary hot water funnel should be used for 
this purpose.82.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.2.4  Cooling
The hot iltered solution is then cooled at a moderate 
rate so that medium sized crystals are formed. Slow 
cooling yields bigger crystals which are likely to include 
considerable amount of solvent carrying impurities 
with it and complicating the drying process.
2.2.5  Collecting the Crystals
When the crystallization is complete, the mixture of 
crystals and the mother liquor is iltered through a 
Gooch crucible using a vacuum pump. Full suction is 
applied in order to drain the mother-liquor from the 
crystals as efectively as possible. When the ilter cake 
is rigid enough it is pressed irmly with a cork to drain 
the left-over liquid. The crystals are then washed with a small portion of cold solvent and the process 
is repeated several times. The mother liquor is quite often concentrated by evaporation and cooled 
to obtain a fresh crop of crystals. The process of crystallizati on appears to be very simple yet the 
success of operation lies in the amount or the percentage of crystall ized product obtained from the 
crude substance.
2.2.6  Drying of the Crystallized Substance
Pressing it between several folds of ilter papers and repeating the pr ocess several times dries the 
crystallized substance. This process has the disadvantage that th e crystals are crushed to a ine 
powder and sometimes the ibres of ilter paper contaminate the product. A lternatively,the crystals 
are dried in an oven provided the substance does not melt or decompose on h eating at 100° C.
A safe and reliable method of drying crystals is through a vac uum desiccator. In this process the 
crystals are spread over a watch glass and kept in a vacuum d esiccator for several hours. The 
drying agents used in a desiccator are CaCl2 , silica gel or phosphorus pentaoxide.
Animation 2.5: Cooling
Source & Credit: Pulsecooling92.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.2.7  Decolourization of Undesirable Colours
Sometimes during the preparation of a crude substance, the colouring  matter or resinous products 
afect the appearance of product and it may appear coloured. Such impurities are conveniently 
removed by boiling the substance in the solvent with the suicient quanti ty of inely powdered 
animal charcoal and then iltering the hot solution. 
The coloured impurities are adsorbed by animal charcoal and th e pure decolourized substance 
crystallizes out from the iltrate on cooling.
2.3 SUBLIMATION
It is a process in which a solid, when heated, vapourizes 
directly without passing through the liquid phase and these 
vapours can be condensed to form the solid again. It is 
frequently used to purify a solid. Examples of such solids ar e 
ammonium chloride, iodine, naphthalene, benzoic acid, etc. 
To carry out the process, the substance is taken in a watch-
glass covered with an inverted funnel. The substance is then 
heated slowly over a sand-bath and the funnel is cooled with 
wet cotton. The pure solid deposits on the inner side of the 
funnel Fig (2.4).
Fig (2.4) SUBLIMATION
Animation 2.6: SUBLIMATION
Source & Credit: support-th102.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
2.4 SOL VENT EXTRACTION
Solvent extraction is an important technique in chemical analysis.  According to this technique a 
solute can be separated from a solution by shaking the solution wi th a solvent in which the solute 
is more soluble and the added solvent does not mix with the solution. Usu ally it is done by placing 
the solution and the second liquid into a separating funnel Fig ( 2.5). The funnel is stoppered and 
the two liquids are shaken together.
The most common laboratory example of solvent extraction is ether extraction.  This is used to 
separate the products of organic synthesis from water. In a typica l organic synthesis, the aqueous 
solution containing the organic product is shaken up with ether i n a separating funnel and allowed 
to separate. 
The inorganic impurities remain in aqueous phase whereas the organic compound goes to the 
ether layer. The ether layer is separated and the organic product is  obtained by evaporating the 
ether. Repeated extractions using small portions of solvent (ether) are mor e eicient than using a 
single but larger volume of solvent. The technique is particularl y useful when the product is volatile 
or thermally unstable.
Solvent extraction is an equilibrium process and follo ws the distribution law or partition 
law. This law states that a solute distributes itself  b etween two immiscible liquids in a 
constant ratio of concentrations irrespective of the am ount of solute added.
The law is based on experimental evidence. Consider, for example, th e distribution of iodine 
between two immiscible solvents, water in the presence of KI and car bon tetrachloride. Iodine 
reacts with iodide ion to produce tri-iodide ion in a reversible rea ction. 
Animation 2.7: Solvent extraction
Source & Credit: chem
Fig.(2.5) Separating funnel112.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
The following dynamic equilibrium is established.
    --
23I  + I (aq)  I (aq) ฀
                       soluble in CCl4  soluble in water
At this point the rate at which iodine passes from CCl4 to water equals the rate at which it passes 
from water to CCl4.
So, if we add CCl4 to an aqueous solution of I3- ions, the iodine will transfer from the aqueous layer into the organ ic 
layer. As a result,the brown colour of the tri-iodide ions fades a nd the purple colour of free iodine molecules 
appears in organic phase. To achieve a good separation, the two liq uids are gently shaken to increase their area 
of contact and improve the chances of transferring iodine molecules. No matter how much iodine is used, the 
ratio of the inal concentrations at equilibrium is constant. The c onstant is called distribution coeicient, K and 
is given by 
K=[l2(CCl4)]/[3( )aqI−]
2.5 CHROMATOGRAPHY
Another important application of the distribution phenomenon is chroma tography. The word 
chromatography originates from the Greek word “Khromatos” meaning col our writing.
Chromatography is a method used primarily for the separation of a  sample of mixture. It involves 
the distribution of a solute between a stationary phase and a mobile phase. The stationary phase 
may be a solid or a liquid supported as a thin ilm on the sur face of an inert solid. The mobile phase 
lowing over the surface of the stationary phase may be a gas or a l iquid.
In chromatography, substances are separated due to their relative ain ities for the stationary 
and mobile phases. The distribution of the components of a mixture b etween the two phases is 
governed by distribution coeicient K.
Concentration of a component in the moving phase
           Concentration of that component in the Stationary phase
The component of a mixture with a small value of K mostly remains in the stationary phase as the 
moving phase lows over it. The component with a greater value of K remai ns largely dissolved in 
the mobile phase and passes over the stationary phase quickly.
Chromatography in which the stationary phase is a solid, is c lassiied as adsorption chromatography. 
In this type, a substance leaves the mobile phase to become adsorbe d on the surface of the solid 
phase.
Chromatography in which the stationary phase is a liquid, i s called partition chromatography. In this 
type, the substances being separated are distributed throughout both the stationary and mobile 
phases.K=122.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
There   are  various techniques of chromatography. One such techn ique namely paper 
chromatography is discussed below.
2.5.1 PAPER CHROMATOGRAPHY
It is a technique of partition chromatography. Here the stationary p hase is a liquid (say H2O) adsorbed 
on paper. The adsorbed water behaves as an immiscible liquid towards the mobile phase, which 
passes over the paper. The mobile phase is usually an organic liquid.
There are three common ways of carrying out paper chromatography n amely (i) ascending (ii) 
descending (iii) radial/circular. Only the ascending typ e will be discussed here. In this technique the 
solvent is in a pool at the bottom of a vessel in which the paper is  supported and the solvent travels 
upwards by capillary action.
Animation 2.8:Chromatography
Source & Credit: Support-th132.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
A solvent mixture, specially composed in accordance with the sampl e to be separated, is poured 
into the chromatographic tank Fig (2.6). Cover the tank to homogenise i ts inner atmosphere. Take 
about 20 cm strip of Whatmann's chromatographic paper No.1 an d draw on it a thin pencil line 
about 2.5 cm from one end. Spot a point, on the pencil line, with th e sample mixture solution. To 
facilitate identiication of the components of the mixture, spots of the know n compounds may also 
be placed alongside.
When the spots have dried, suspend the paper with clips so that the 
impregnated end dips into solvent mixture to a depth of 5-6 mm. 
Cover the tank. As the solvent front passes the spots, the solutes 
begin to move upward. The rate at which they move depends on 
their distribution coeicients. When the solvent front has risen to 
about 3/4 th of the length of the paper, remove the strip, mark the 
solvent front with a pencil and allow the strip to dry.
Animation 2.9:  P APER CHROMATOGRAPHY
Source & Credit: chem
Fig. (2.6) Paper chromatography142.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Once the paper is dried, the pattern on the paper is called a chrom atogram. The diferent components 
of the mixture, if coloured, can visually be identiied. If colourl ess, the chromatogram has to be 
developed by chemical methods or physical techniques used to identif y the spots. Each component 
has a speciic retardation factor called Rf value. The Rf value is related to its distribution coeicient 
and is given by:
With reference to Fig 2.7 the chromatogram shows that the sample A con tains both components 
B and C. The Rf values for B and C are given by:
Rf(B)= x/y
Rf(C)=z/y
Uses of Chromatography
The techniques of chromatography are very useful in organic 
synthesis for separation, isolation and puriication of the 
products. They are equally important in qualitative and 
quantitative analyses and for determination of the purity of a 
substance.
Fig. (2.7) ChromatogramRf=Distance travelled by a component from the original spot
Distance travelled by solvent from the original spot
Animation 2.10: Uses of Chromatography
Source & Credit: Dynamicscience152.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1. A complete characterization of a compound must include both quali tative and quantitative 
analyses.
2. A complete quantitative analysis of a compound generally involves fou r major steps.
3. The process of iltration is used to separate insoluble particles fr om liquids and it can be performed with 
several types of ilter media.
4. If the process of iltration with the ilter paper is to run smoothly, th e stem of the funnel should remain 
continuously full of liquid as long as there is liquid in th e conical portion.
5. The iltering operation with the ilter paper could be very time consumin g if it were not aided by a gentle 
suction as liquid passes through the stem. This suction cannot d evelop unless the paper its tightly all 
around the upper circumference of the funnel.
6. The rate of iltration can be considerably increased using a luted ilter paper.
7. A solid compound is puriied by crystallization from  a suitable solvent. A solvent for crystallization s hould be 
able to dissolve the solute at high temperature and th e maximum amount of the solute should be thrown 
out by the solvent when the solution is cooled. The process of crystalli zation involves many steps.
8. The process of sublimation involves converting a solid directly into va pours and these vapours are then 
condensed to form solid again. It is frequently used to purify a  solid.
9. Solvent extraction technique involves the separation of a solute from a s olution by shaking it 
with an immiscible solvent in which the solute is more soluble.  The technique is mostly applied 
to separate organic compounds from water.
10. Repeated extractions using small portions of solvent are more eicien t than using a single 
extraction but large volume of solvent.
11. Solvent extraction is an equilibrium process and it is control led by distribution law. The 
technique is particularly useful when the compound to be separa ted is volatile or thermally 
unstable.
12. Chromatography is a technique used for separating the componen ts of a mixture. These 
components are distributed between a stationary and a mobile phase. T he stationary phase 
may be a solid or a liquid supported on a solid. It adsorbs th e mixture under separation. The 
mobile phase may be a liquid or a gas and while passing over the stationary phase, competes 
with it for the constituents of the mixture.
13. In paper chromatography, the stationary phase is water adsorbed on paper. The mobile 
phase is usually an organic liquid.
14. The techniques of chromatography are very useful in organic synth esis for separation, 
isolation and puriication of the products.162.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q.1  Multiple choice questions.
(i)  A iltration process could be very time consuming if it were n ot aided by a gentle suction which is   
 developed:
(a) if the paper covers the funnel upto its circumference.
(b) if the paper has got small sized pores in it.
(c) if the stem of the funnel is large so that it dips into the iltra te.
(d) if the paper its tightly.
(ii)  During the process of crystallization, the hot saturated solu tion:
(a) is cooled very slowly to get large sized crystals.
(b) is cooled at a moderate rate to get medium sized crystals.
(c) is evaporated to get the crystals of the product.
(d) is mixed with an immiscible liquid to get the pure crystal s of the product.
(iii)  Solvent extraction is an equilibrium process and it is c ontrolled by.
(a) law of mass action.   (b) the amount of solvent used.
(c) distribution law.   (d) the amount of solute.
(iv)  Solvent extraction method is a particularly useful technique f or separation when the product to be   
 separated is:
(a) non-volatile or thermally unstable.   (b) volatile or thermally  stable.
(c) non-volatile or thermally stable.    (d) volatile or thermally u nstable.
(v)  The comparative rates at which the solutes move in paper chromatog raphy, depend on:
(a) the size of paper    (b) R values Of solutes.
(c) temperature of the experiment.  (d) size of the chromatographic tan k used.
Fill in the blanks.
1. A complete chemical characterization of a compound must include__ _______.
2. During iltration the tip of the stem of the funnel should touch the s ide of the beaker to 
avoid_________.
3. A luted ilter paper is used to_________ the process of iltration .
4. A solvent used for crystallization is required to dissolve of the sub stance at its boiling point 
and_______ at the room temperature.
5. Repeated solvent extractions using small portions of solvent are_____ _____________ than using a 
single extraction with larger volume of the solvent.172.EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN CHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Q.3 Tick the correct sentences. If the sentence is incorrect, write the c orrect statements.
(i) A qualitative analysis involves the identiication of elements presen t in a compound.
(ii) If the process of iltration is to run smoothly, the stem of the fu nnel should remain empty.
(iii)If none of the solvents is found suitable for crystallization a combination of two or more 
immiscible solvents may be used.
(iv) A solute distributes itself between two immiscible liquids in  a constant ratio of  concentrations 
depending upon the amount of solvent added.
(v) Paper chroma tography is a technique of partition chromatograp hy.
Q.4    Why is there a need to crystallize the crude product?
Q.5  A water insoluble organic compound aspirin is prepar ed by the reaction of salicylic acid with a mixture  
 of acetic acid and acetic anhydride. How will you separate the product from the reaction mixture?
Q.6  A solid organic compound is soluble in water as well as  in chloroform. During its preparation,   
        it remains in aqueous layer. Describe a method to obtain from this layer.
Q.7  The following igure shows a developed  chromatogram on paper with ive spots. 
(i) Unknown mixture X
(ii) Sample A 
(iii) Sample B
(iv) Sample C
(v) Sample D
Find out (i) the composition of unknown mixture X 
(ii) which sample is impure and what is its composition.
Q.8 In solvent extraction technique, why repeated extraction using sma ll portions of solvent are       
          more eicient than using a single extraction but larger  volume of solvent?
Q.9  Write down the main characteristics of a solvent selected for cr ystallization of a compound.
Q.10  You have been provided with a mixture containin g three inks with diferent colours. Write down the  
 procedure to separate the mixture with the help of paper chromatography .