CHAPTER
11    REACTION KINETICS
Animation 11.1: Spectrometer
Source & Credit: eLearn211 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.0.0 INTRODUCTION
 It is a common observation that rates of chemical reactions difer grea tly. Many reactions, 
in aqueous solutions, are so rapid that they seem to occur instantaneou sly. For example, a white 
precipitate of silver chloride is formed immediately on addition of s ilver nitrate solution to sodium 
chloride solution. Some reactions proceed at a moderate rate e.g. hydroly sis of an ester. Still other 
reactions take a much longer time, for example,the rusting of iron, the chemical weathering of 
stone work of buildings by acidic gases in the atmosphere and th e fermentation of sugars.
The studies concerned with rates of chemical reactions and the factor s that afect the rates of 
chemical reactions constitute the subject matter of reaction kinetics.  These studies also throw light 
on the mechanisms of reactions. All reactions occur in single or a series of steps. If a reaction 
consists of several steps, one of the steps will be the slowest than all other steps. The slowest step 
is called the rate determining step. The other steps will not afect the rate. The rates of reactions 
and their control are often important in industry. They might be the deciding factors that determine 
whether a certain chemical reaction may be used economically or not.  Many factors inluence the 
rate of a chemical reaction. It is important to discover the conditions under which the reaction will 
proceed most economically.
Animation 11.2: Kinetics
Source & Credit : ceb.cam311 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.1.0 RATE OF REACTION
 During a chemical reaction, reactants are converted into products. S o the concentration of 
the products
increases with the corresponding decrease in the concentration of the rea ctants as they are being 
consumed.
The situation is explained graphically in Fig.(11.1) for th e reactant A which is changing irreversibly 
to the product B. 
 The slope of the graph for the reactant or the product is the steepest at th e beginning. This 
shows a rapid decrease in the concentration of the reactant and conseq uently, a rapid increase in 
the concentration of the product. As the reaction proceeds, the slope becomes less steep indicating 
that the reaction is slowing down with time. It means that the rate of a reaction is changing every 
moment. The following curve for reactants should touch the time axis in the l ong run. This is the 
stage of completion of reaction. The rate of a reaction is deined as the change in concentration of 
a reactant or a product divided by the tim e taken for the change.
Animation 11.3: RATE OF REACTION
Source & Credit : blobs411 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 
 The rate of reaction has the units of concentration divided by time. Usu ally the concentration 
is expressed in mol dm-3 and the time in second, thus the units for the reaction rate are mol d m-3s-1.
   change in concentration of the substanceRate of reaction = time taken for the change
 For a gas phase reaction, units of pressure are used in place of molar concentrations. It follows 
from the above graph that the change in concentration of the reactant A or  the product B is much 
more at the start of reaction and then it decreases gradually.
So the reaction rate decreases with time. It never remains uniform duri ng diferent time periods. It 
decreases continuously till the reaction ceases.
    -3
-3 -1 mol dmRate of reaction =  = mol dm  ssecondsFig. (11.1) Change in the concentration of reactants an d products with time for the reaction 
AB→511 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.1.1 Instantaneous and Average Rate
 The rate at any one instant during the interval is called the instan taneous rate. The rate of 
reaction between two speciic time intervals is called the average rate of r eaction.
The average rate and instantaneous rate are equal for only one instant in any time interval. At irst, 
the instantaneous rate is higher than the average rate. At the end of the i nterval the instantaneous 
rate becomes lower than the average rate. As the time interval becomes small er, the average rate 
becomes closer to the instantaneous rate. 
 The average rate will be equal to the instantaneous rate when the time in terval approaches 
zero. Thus the rate of reaction is instantaneous change in the concentr ation of a reactant or a 
product at a given moment of time.
     dxRate of reaction = dt
 Where dx is a very small change in the concentration of a produc t in a very small time interval 
dt. Hence, dx/dt is also called rate of change of concentration with  respect to time.
 The rate of a general reaction, AB→, can be expressed in terms of rate of disappearance of 
the reactant A or jthe rate of appearance of the product B. Mathematical ly,
    -d[A] d[B]Rate of reaction =    =    +dt dt
 Where d[A] and d[B] are the changes in the concentrations of A a nd B, respectively. The 
negative sign in the term indicates a decrease in the concentration of th e reactant A. Since the 
concentration of product increases with time, the sign in rate express ion involving the change of 
concentration of product is positive.611 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.1.2 Speciic Rate Constant or Velocity Constant
 The relationship between the rate of a chemical reaction and the active masses, expressed as 
concentrations, of the reacting substances is summarized in the la w of mass action. It states that 
the rate of reaction is proport ional to the active mass of the reactant or to the product of active 
masses if more than one reactants are involved in a chemical reaction . 
Animation 11.4: Average and Instantaneous Rate of C hange
Source & Credit : brilliant711 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
For dilute solutions, active mass is considered as equal to concentra tion. By applying the law of 
mass action to a general reaction.
    aA + bB  cC + dD →
 Rate of reaction ab= k [A]   [B]
 This expression is called rate equation. The brackets [  ] repr esent the concentrations and the 
proportionality constant k is called rate constant or velocity constant f or the reaction.
 If -3 -3[A] = 1 mol dm  and [B] = 1 mol dm
  abRate of reaction = k × 1  × 1  = k
 Hence the speciic rate constant of a chemical reaction is the rate of r eaction when the 
concentrations of the reactants are unity . Under the given conditions, k remains constant, but it 
changes with temperature.
Animation 11.5: Velocity Constant
Source & Credit : wikia811 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.1.3 Order of Reaction
For a general reaction between A and B where ‘a’ moles of A and ‘b ’ moles of B react to form ’c’ 
moles of C and ’d’ moles of D.
    aA + bB  cC + dD →
We can write the rate equation as:
     abR =k [A]  [B]
 The exponent ’a’ or ‘b’ gives the order of reaction with respect to the in dividual reactant. Thus 
the reaction is of order ‘a’ with respect to A and of order b with res pect to B. The overall order 
of reaction is (a+b). The order of reaction is given by the sum of all the exponents to which  the 
concentrations in the rate equation are raised. The order of reaction ma y also be deined as the 
number of reacting molecules, whose concentrations alter as a result of the chemical change.
 It is important to note that the order of a reaction is an experimentally  determined quantity 
and can not be inferred simply by looking at the reaction equation.  The sum of the exponents in 
the rate equation may or may not be the same as in a balanced chemi cal equation. The chemical 
reactions are classiied as zero, irst, second and third order rea ctions. The order of reaction provides 
valuable information about the mechanism of a reaction.
Animation 11.6: Rate and Order of Reac-
tion
Source & Credit : science.uwaterloo911 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Examples of Reactions Showing Different Orders
1.  Decomposition of nitrogen pentoxide involves the following equation.
    25 24 22N O (g)   2N O (g) + O (g) →
The experimentally determined rate equation for this reaction is as fol lows:
     25 Rate = k[N O ]
This equation suggests that the reaction is irst order with respect to th e concentration of N2O5.
2.  Hydrolysis of tertiary butyl bromide
  
3CH     3CH  
    3CH  C 2Br + H O → 3CH   C OH + HBr  
  3CH     3CH  
The rate equation determined experimentally for this reaction is
     33 Rate = k[(CH ) CBr]
 The rate of reaction remains efectively independent of the concentration of water because, 
being a solvent, it is present in very large excess. Such type of rea ctions have been named as 
pseudo irst order reactions.
3.  Oxidation of nitric oxide with ozone has been shown to be irst or der with respect to NO and 
irst order with respect to O3. The sum of the individual orders gives the overall order of reaction as 
two.
    3 22 NO(g)+O (g) NO (g)+O (g) →
     3 Rate = k[NO][O ]
4.  Consider the following reaction
   3 222FeCl (aq) + 6KI(aq) 2FeI (aq) + 6KCI(aq) + I →1011 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 This reaction involves eight reactant molecules but experimentally it h as been found to be a 
third order reaction.
    2
3 Rate = k[FeCl ][KI]
 This rate equation suggests that the reaction is, in fact, taking place in more than one steps. 
The possible steps of the reaction are shown below.   
    slow
32FeCl (aq) + 2KI(aq) FeI (aq) + 2KCI(aq) + C l (aq)−  → 
    fast -
2 2KI(aq) + 2Cl (aq) 2KCl(aq) + I (s)  →
5.  The order of a reaction is usually positive integer or a zero, b ut it can also be in fraction or can 
have a negative value. Consider the formation of carbon tetrachloride from  chloroform.
  
    32 4CHCl ( )+Cl (g) CCl ( )+HCl(g) → 
    1/2
32 Rate = k[CHCl ][Cl ]
The sum of exponents will be 1 + 1/2= 1.5, so the order of this r eaction is 1.5.
 From the above examples, it is clear that order of reaction is not neces sarily depending upon 
the coeients of balanced equation. The rate equation is an experimental expression. A reaction 
is said to be zero order if it is entirely independent of the concentrati on of reactant molecules. 
Photochemical reactions are usually zero order.
11.1.4 Half Life Period
 Half life period of a reaction is the time required to convert 50% of th e reactants into products. 
For example, the half life period for the decomposition of N2O5 at 45°C is 24 minutes.
 It means that if we decompose 0.10 mole dm-3 of N2O5 at 45 °C, then after 24 minutes 0.05 
mole dm-3 of N2O5 will be left behind. Similarly after 48 minutes 0.025(25%)  mole dm-3 of N2O5 will 
remain unreacted and after 72 minutes (3 half times) 0.0125 ( 12.5%) mole dm-3 of N2O5, will remain 
unreacted.1111 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 Decomposition of N2O5 is a irst order reaction and the above experiment proves that the 
half-life period of this reaction is independent of the initial conc entration of N2O5. This is true for all 
irst order reactions. The disintegration of radioactive 235
92U has a half-life of 7.1x108 or 710 million 
years. If one kilogram sample disintegrates, then 0.5 kg of it i s converted to daughter elements in 
710 million years. Out of 0.5 kg of 235
92U, 0.25kg disintegrates in the next 710 million years. So, the 
half-life period for the disintegration of a radioactive substance i s independent of the amount of 
that substance.
 What is true for the half-life period of irst order reactions does n ot remain true for the 
reactions having higher orders. In the case of second order reaction,  the half-life period is inversely 
proportional to the initial concentration of the reactant. For a third ord er reaction, half life is 
inversely proportional to the square of initial concentration of reactants . Briely we can say that
    1/2 1 1/2 1 o1 0.693[t ] ,  scince[t ] =  ak∝
  
    1/2 2 1/2 2 1
a11[t ] ,  scince[t ] =  ak∝
Where 1/2 1[t ], 1/2 2[t ], and 1/2 3[t ] are the half-life periods for 1st, 
2nd and 3rd order reactions respectively and ‘a’ is the initial 
concentration of reactants. In general for the reaction of nth 
order:
     1/2 n n-11[t ]a∝
 The half-life period of any order reaction is, thus, inversely 
proportional to the initial concentration raised to the power 
one less than the order of that reaction. So, if one knows the 
initial concentration and half-life period of a reaction, then 
order of that reaction can be determined.1/2 3 1/2 3 221 1.5[t ] ,  scince[t ] =  
a ka∝
Animation 11.7: Half Life
Source & Credit : askiitians1211 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Example 1:
 Calculate the half-life period of the following reaction when the in itial concentration of HI is 
0.05 M.
    22 2HI(g) H (g) + I (g) ฀     
The value of rate constant k = 0.079 dm3 mol-1 s-1 at 508 °C and rate expression is
    
    2Rate = k[HI]
Solution:
 According to the rate expression it is a second order reaction. The h alf life paired of a second 
order reaction is
    1 2-1
2211t =  =  ka ka

Putting the values of k and a.
 So,
   1 3 -1 -1 -3
2211 1t =  =  sec.k x a (0.079dm mol s )(0.050moldm ) 0.079 x 0.05= 
  
    1
22t = 253secAnswer

 So, in 253 seconds, the half of HI i.e., 0.05/2=0.025 moles  is decomposed.
11.1.5 Rate Determining Step
 Finding out the rate equation of a reaction experimentally is very us eful. Actually it gives us 
an opportunity to look into the details of reaction. Rate equation of exampl e (4) in article 11.1.3 
showed clearly that the reaction is taking place in more than one step s. There are many such 
reactions in chemistry which occur in a series of steps.1311 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 If a reaction occurs in several steps, one of the steps is the slowest.  The rate of this step 
determines the overall rate of reaction. This slowest step is called the r ate determining or rate 
limiting step. The total number of molecules of reacting species taki ng part in the rate determining 
step appear in the rate equation of the reaction.
 Let us consider the following reaction
    22NO (g) + CO(g) NO(g) + CO (g) →
 The rate equation of the reaction is found to be
    2
2 Rate = k[NO ]
 This equation shows that the rate of reaction is independent of the conc entration of carbon 
monoxide. In other words the equation tells us that reaction involves more th an one steps and 
two molecules of NO2 are involved in the rate determining step. The proposed mechanism for this 
reaction is as follows.
 slow
22 3NO (g) + NO (g) NO (g) + NO(g)   → (rate determining step)
 fast
3 22NO (g) + CO(g) NO (g) + CO (g)  →
The irst step is the rate determining step and 
NO3 which does not appear in the inal balanced 
equation, is called the reaction intermediate. 
The reaction intermediate has a temporary 
existence and it is unstable relative to the 
reactants and the products.  This is a species 
with normal bonds and may be stable enough 
to be isolated under special conditions. This 
reaction is a clear example of the fact that a 
balanced chemical equation may not give 
any information about the way the reaction 
actually takes place.
Animation 11.8: Rate Determining Step
Source & Credit : 800mainstreet1411 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.2.0 DETERMINATION OF THE RATE OF A CHEMICAL REAC TION
 Determination of the rate of a chemical reaction involves the measurement of the concentration 
of reactants or products at regular time intervals as the reaction prog resses. When the reaction 
goes on, the concentrations of reactants decrease and those of products in crease. The rate of a 
reaction, therefore, is expressed in terms of the rates at which the conc entrations change.
   -3C mol dmRate of reaction =  = t seconds∆
∆
     -3 -1=mol dm s
 Suppose, the concentration of a reactant of any chemical reaction ch anges by 0.01 mol dm-3 
in one second, then rate of reaction is, 0 .01 mole dm-3 s-1.
 Rate of a chemical reaction always decreases with the passage of time during the progress of 
reaction. To determine the rate of reaction for a 
given length of time, a graph is plotted between 
time on x-axis and concentration of reactant on 
y-axis whereby a curve is obtained.
 To illustrate it, let us investigate the 
decomposition of HI to H2 and I2 at 508°C. 
Table(11.1) tells us that the change in 
concentration of HI for irst 50 seconds is 0.0284 
mol dm-3 but between 300 to 350 sec, the 
decrease is 0.0031 mol dm3. By using the data, a 
graph is plotted as shown in Fig (11.2). The graph 
is between time on x-axis and concentration of 
HI in mol dm-3 on y-axis. Since HI is a reactant, 
so it is a falling curve. The steepness of the 
concentration-time curve relects the progress 
of reaction. Greater the slope of curve near the 
start of reaction, greater is the rate of reaction.
Fig.(l1.2) T he change in the HI concentration with ti me for the
reaction 22 2HI(g) H (g) + I (g) ฀  at 508°C.1511 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 
In order to measure the rate of reaction, draw a tangent say, at 100 seconds, on the curve and 
measure the slope of that tangent. The slope of the tangent is the rate of rea ction at that point 
i.e., after 100 seconds. A right angled triangle ABC is compl eted with a tangent as hypotenuse. Fig. 
(11.2) shows that in 110 sec, the change in concentration is 0. 027 mole dm-3, and hence the
    -30.027mol dmSlope or rate = 110 sec
   
    -4 -3 -1=2.5x10  mol dm sConcentration of
HI (mol dm-3)Time (s)
0.100
0.0716
0.0558
0.0457
0.0387
0.0336
0.0296
0.02650
50
100
150
200
250
300
350Table (11.1) Change in 
concentration of HI with regular 
intervals 22 2HI(g) H (g) + I (g) ฀
Animation 11.9: Chemical Reaction Rates
Source & Credit : crescentok1611 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 This value of rate means that in a period of one sec in 1 dm3 solution, the concentration of HI 
disappears by 2.5 x 10-4 moles, changing into the products.
 The right angled triangle ABC can be of any size, but the resu lts for the rate of reaction will be 
the same.
 If we plot a graph between time on x-axis and concentration of any  of the products i.e H2 or I2, 
then a rising curve is obtained. The value of the tangent at 100 secon ds will give the same value of 
rate of reaction as 2.5 x 10-4 mol dm-3S-1.
 The change in concentrations of reactants or products can be determi ned by both physical 
and chemical methods depending upon the type of reactants or products  involved.
11.2.1 Physical Methods
 Some of the methods used for this purpose cure the following: In these methods, a curve has 
to be plotted as mentioned in 11.2.0. The nature of the curve may be ri sing for products and falling 
for reactants. Anyhow, the results will be same for the same reacti on under the similiar conditions.
(i)  Spectrometry 
 This method is applicable if a reactant or a product absorbs u ltraviolet, visible or infrared 
radiation. The rate of reaction can be measured by measuring the a mount of radiation absorbed.
Animation 11.10: Electrical Conductivity of materia ls focused on polymer
Source & Credit : wikidot1711 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
(ii)  Electrical Conductivity Method
 The rate of a reaction involving ions can be studied by electrical conductivity method. The 
conductivity of such a solution depends upon the rate of change of con centration of the reacting 
ions or the ions formed during the reaction. The conductivity will b e proportional to the rate of 
change in the concentration of such ions.
(iii)  Dilatometric Method
 This method is useful for those reactions, which involve small volu me changes in solutions. 
The volume change is directly proportional to the extent of reaction.
(iv)  Refractrometric Method
 This method is applicable to reactions in solutions, where there ar e changes in refractive 
indices of the substances taking part in the chemical reactions.
(v)  Optical Rotation Method
 In this method, the angle through which plane polarized light i s rotated by the reacting mixture 
is measured by a polarimeter. The extent of rotation determ ines the concen tration of optically 
active substance. If any of the species in the reaction mixture is op tically active, then this method 
can be followed to ind out the rate of reaction.
11.2.2 Chemical Method
 This is particularly suitable for reactions in solution. In this method, we do the chemical 
analysis of a reactant or a product.
 The acid hydrolysis of an ester (ethyl acetate) in the presence of a  small amount of an acid is 
one of the best examples.
    +H (catalyst)
3 25 2 3 25CH COOC H ( ) + H O( ) CH COOH( ) + C H OH( ) ฀฀฀฀฀฀ ฀    ฀ ฀฀฀฀฀ ฀1811 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 In case of hydrolysis of an ester, the solution of ester in water an d the acid acting as a catalyst 
are allowed to react. After some time, a sample of reaction mixture is withdrawn by a pipette 
and run into about four times its volume of ice cold water. The dilu tion and chilling stops the 
reaction. The acid formed is titrated against a standard alkali , say NaOH, using phenolphthalein as 
an indicator.
The analysis is repeated at various time intervals after the start of r eaction. This would provide 
an information about the change in concentration of acetic acid form ed during the reaction at 
diferent time intervals. The diferent concentrations of acetic acid are plotted against the time 
whereby a rising curve is obtained as shown in Fig (11.3). 
The slope of the curve at any point will give the rate of reaction. Initi ally, the rate of reaction is high 
but it decreases with the passage of time. When the curve becomes horizon tal, the rate becomes 
zero.
 If we plot the graph for decreasing concentrations of CH3COOC2H5, then falling curves 
are obtained as shown in Fig.(11.2) If we have any laboratory technique to record the changing 
concentration of ester or alcohol, we can measure the rate of the reaction. This is a pseudo irst 
order reaction. Actually water being in large excess in comparis on to ester does not afect the rate 
and we think that water is not taking part in the reaction.
Fig. (11.3 ) Measurement of rate of ester hydrolysis1911 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.3. ENERGY OF ACTIVATION
 For a chemical reaction to take place, the particles atoms, ions or molecules of reactants must 
form a homogeneous mixture and collide with one another. These collisi ons may be efective or 
inefective depending upon the energy of the colliding particles. When these collisions are efective 
they give rise to the products otherwise the colliding particles just bou nce back. The efective 
collisions can take place only when the colliding particles wil l possess certain amount of energy 
and they approach each other with the proper orientation. The idea of p roper orientation means 
that at the time of collision, the atoms which are required to make new bonds should collide with 
each other. The minimum amount of energy, required for an efective collision is  called activation 
energy.
 If all the collisions among the reacting species at a given tempera ture are efective in forming 
the products, the reaction is completed in a very short time. Most of the r eactions, are, however, 
slow showing that all the collisions are not equally efective.
Animation 11.11: Chemical Method
Source & Credit : fg-a2011 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 Let us study a reaction between molecules A2 and B2 to form a new molecule AB. If these 
molecules will have energy equal to or more than the activation energy, th en upon collisions their 
bonds will break and new bonds will be formed. The phenomenon i s shown in Fig. (11.4)
 Activated complex is an unstable combination of all the atoms involved  in the reaction 
for which the energy is maximum. It is a short lived species an d decomposes into the products 
immediately. It has a transient existence, that is why it is also called a transition state.
 When the colliding molecules come close to each other at the time of colli sion, they slow 
down, collide and then ly apart. If the collision is efective then th e molecules lying apart are 
chemically diferent otherwise the same molecules just bounce back.
 When the molecules slow down just before the collision, their kinetic energy decreases and 
this results in the corresponding increase in their potential energy.  The process can be understood 
with the help of a graph between the path of reaction and the potential en ergy of the reacting 
molecules. Fig. (11.5a,b)
 The reactants reach the peak of the curve to form the activated complex. Ea is the energy of 
activation and it appears as a potential energy hill between the reacta nts and the products. Only, 
the colliding molecules with proper activation energy, will be able to climb up the hill and give the 
products. If the combined initial kinetic energy of the reactants is  less than Ea, they will be unable 
to reach the top of the hill and fall back chemically unchanged .
 This potential energy diagram can also be used to study the heat evol ved or absorbed during 
the reaction. The heat of reaction is equal to the diference in potential en ergy of the reactants and 
the products. For exothermic reactions, the products are at a lower energ y level than the reactants 
and the decrease in potential energy appears as increase in kinetic  energy of the products Fig. 
(11.5a). For endothermic reactions, the products are at higher ener gy level than the reactants and 
for such reactions a continuous source of energy is needed to complete th e reaction Fig. (11.5b).
Fig. (11.4) Collisions of molecules, formation of activat ed complex and formation of products2111 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 
 The energy of activation of forward and backward reactions are d iferent for all the reactions. 
For exothermic reactions the energy of activation of forward reaction is less than that of backward 
reaction, while reverse is true for endothermic reactions. Energy of ac tivation of a reaction provides 
a valuable information about the way a reaction takes place and thu s helps to understand the 
reaction.
Fig. (11.5) A graph between path of reaction and the potential energy of the reaction2211 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 
11.4 FINDING THE ORDER OF REACTION
 The order of a reaction is the sum of exponents of the concentration terms  in the rate 
expression of that reaction.
 It can be determined by the following methods.
(i)  Method of hit and trial
(ii)  Graphical method
(iii)  Diferential method
(iv)  Half life method
(v)  Method of large excess
Here we will only discuss half-life method and the method of larg e excess.
Animation 11.12: Activation Energy and Spontaneous reactions
Source & Credit : thompsona2311 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.4.1 Half Life Method
 As mentioned earlier, half life of a reaction is inversely proporti onal to the initial concentration 
of reactants raised to the power one less than the order of reaction.
 Therefore,    1/2 n n-11(t )a∝
 Let us perform a reaction twice by taking two diferent initial conc entrations ‘a1’ and ‘a2’ and 
their half-life periods are found to be t1 and t2 respectively.
    12 n-1 n-1
1211t and taa∝∝
Dividing the two relations:  n-1
12
21ta=ta

Taking log on both sides:  12
21talog =(n-1)logta

Animation 11.13: Determination of Order of a Reacti on
Source & Credit : askiitians2411 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
       1
2
2
1tlogtn1
aloga
−=

Rearranging     1
2
2
1tlogtn1
aloga
= +

So, if we know the two initial concentrations and two half life valu es we can calculate the order of 
reaction (n).
Example 2:
 In the thermal decomposition of N2O at 760 °C, the time required to decompose half of 
the reactant was 255 seconds at the initial pressure of 290 mm Hg  and 212 seconds at the initial 
pressure of 360 mmHg. Find the order of this reaction.
Animation 11.14: Half Life
Source & Credit : wikipedia2511 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Solution:
 The initial pressures of N2O(g) are the initial concentrations.
 Data  1a  = 290mm Hg 1t  = 255 seconds
   2a  = 360mm Hg 2t  = 212 seconds
Formula used
    1
2
2
1tlogtn1
aloga
= +

Putting the values in the above equation
    255log212n1360log290
= +

    0.0802n = 1+0.0940
    n = 1 + 0.85 = 1.85 2 ≈
 1.85 is close to 2, hence the reaction is of second order.
11.4.2 Method of Large Excess
 In this method, one of the reactants is taken in a very small amoun t as compared to the rest 
of the reactants. The active masses of the substances in large excess remain constant throughout. 
That substance taken in small amount controls the rate and the order is noted with respect to that.
 The reason is that a small change in concentration of a substan ce taken in very small amount 
afects the value of rate more appreciably. The hydrolysis of ethyl a cetate as mentioned earlier 
shows that water being in large excess does not determine the order.2611 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 In this way, the reaction is repeated by taking rest of the substan ces in small amounts one by 
one and overall order is calculated. The method will be further elab orated in article 11.5.2.
11.5. F ACTORS AFFECTING RATES OF REACTIONS
 All those factors which change the number of efective collisions per  second, afect the rate 
of a chemical reaction. Some of the important factors are as follows.
11.5.1 Nature of Reactants
 The rate of reaction depends upon the nature of reacting substances. The chemical reactivity 
of the substances is controlled by the electronic arrangements in their  outermost orbitals. The 
elements of I-A group have one ejectron in their outermost s-orbital. They react with water more 
swiftly than those of II-A group elements having two electrons in their  outermost s-orbital. Similarly, 
the neutralization and double decomposition reactions are very fast as compared to those reactions 
in which bonds are rearranged. Oxidation-reduction reactions i nvolve the transfer of electrons and 
are slower than ionic reactions.
Animation 11.15: FACTORS AFFECTING 
RATES OF REACTIONS
Source & Credit : askiitians2711 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.5.2 Concentration of Reactants
 The reactions are due to collisions of reactant molecules. The frequen cy with which the 
molecules collide depends upon their concentrations. The more crowded th e molecules are, the 
more likely they are to collide and react with one another. Thus, an increase in the concentrations 
of the reactants will result in the corresponding increase in the rea ction rate, while a decrease in 
the concentrations will have a reverse efect. For example, combustion that occurs slowly in air (21 
% oxygen) will occur more rapidly in pure oxygen.
 Similarly, limestone reacts with diferent concentrations of hydroch loric acid at diferent rates. 
In the case of a gaseous reactant, its concentration can be increased  by increasing its pressure. 
Therefore, a mixture of H2 and Cl2 will react twice as fast if the partial pressure of H2 or Cl2 is 
increased from 0.5 to 1.0 atmosphere in the presence of excess of the oth er component.
 The efect of change in concentration on the rate of a chemical reaction  can be nicely 
understood from the following gaseous reaction.
  2 22 2NO(g) + 2H (g) 2H O(g) + N (g) →
 In this reaction, four moles of the reactants form three moles of the pr oducts, so the pressure 
drop takes place during the progress of reaction. The rates of reacti on between NO and H2 at 
800°C are studied by noting the change in pressure. The followin g Table (11.2 ) has been obtained 
experimentally for the above reaction.
Animation 11.16: Reactants
Source & Credit : giphy2811 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Table (11.2)shows the results of six experiments. In the irst three experiments the concentration 
of H2 is increased by keeping the concentration of NO constant. By doubl ing the concentration of 
H2, the rate is doubled and by tripling the concentration of H2, the rate is tripled. So, the rate of 
reaction is directly proportional to the irst power of concentration of H2.
     2 Rate [H ]∝
In the next three experiments, the concentration of H2 is kept constant. By doubling the concentration 
of NO, the rate increases four times and by tripling the concentrati on of NO the rate is increased 
nine times. So, the rate is proportional to the square of concentration of NO.
     2Rate [NO]∝
The overall rate equation of reaction is,
     2
2 Rate [H ][NO]∝
  or   12
2 Rate = k[H ][NO]
 Hence, the reaction is a third order one. This inal equation is th e rate law for this reaction. 
It should be kept in mind that rate law cannot be predicted from the balanced chemical equation. 
This set of experiments helps us to determine the order of reaction as wel l.Table (11.2) Effect of change in 
concentrations of reactants on 
the rate of reaction
[NO] in
(mol dm-3)[H2] in
(mol dm-3)Initial rate
(atm min-1)
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.001
0.002
0.0030.001
0.002
0.003
0.009
0.009
0.0090.025
0.050
0.075
0.0063
0.025
0.0562911 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 The possible mechanism consisting of two steps for the reaction is as follows:
(i) slow
2 2 22 2NO(g) + H (g)  N (g) + H O (g)   →  (rate determining)
(ii)  fast
22 2 2H O (g) H (g) 2H O(g) +  →
The step (i) is slow and rate determining.
11.5.3 Surface Area
 The increased surface area of reactants, increases the possibili ties of atoms and molecules of 
reactants to come in contact with each other and the rates enhance. For ex ample, AI foil reacts with 
NaOH moderately when warmed, but powdered AI reacts rapidly with  cold NaOH and H2 is evolved 
with frothing.
   2 42 2AI + 2NaOH + 6H O 2NaAI(OH)  + 3H →
Animation 11.17: Concentration of Reactants
Source & Credit : socratic3011 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 Similarly, CaCO3 in the powder form reacts with dilute H2SO4 more eiciently than its big 
pieces.
11.5.4 Light
Light consists of photons having deinite 
amount of energies depending upon 
their frequencies. When the reactants 
are irradiated, this energy becomes 
available to them and rates of reactions 
are enhanced. The reaction of CH4 and 
Cl2 requires light. The reaction between 
H2 and Cl2 at ordinary pressure is 
negligible in darkness, slow in daylight, 
but explosive in sunlight. Similarly, light 
is vital in photosynthesis, and the rate is 
inluenced by light.
Animation 11.18: Surface Area
Source & Credit : darelhardy
Animation 11.19: Light
Source & Credit : wikipedia3111 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.5.5 Effect of Temperature on Rate of Reaction
 The collision theory of reaction rates convinces us that the rate of a r eaction is proportional to 
the number of collisions among the reactant molecules. Anything, tha t can increase the frequency 
of collisions should increase the rate. We also know, that every colli sion does not lead to a reaction. 
For a collision, to be efective the molecules must possess the activation ener gy and they must also 
be properly oriented. For nearly all chemical reactions, the activati on energy is quite large and at 
ordinary temperature very few molecules are moving fast enough to have thi s minimum energy.
 All  the molecules of a reactant do not possess the same energy at a p articular temperature. 
Most of the molecules will possess average energy. A fraction of total m olecules will have energy 
more than the average energy. This fraction of molecules is indicated  as shaded area in Fig.(11.6).
 As the temperature increases, the number of molecules in this fracti on also increases. There 
happens a wider distribution of velocities. The curve at higher temper ature T2 has lattened. It shows 
that molecules having higher 
energies have increased and 
those with less energies have 
deceased. So, the number of 
efective collisions increases 
and hence the rate increases. 
When the temperature of the 
reacting gases is raised by 
10K, the fraction of molecule 
with energy more than Ea 
roughly doubles and so the 
reaction rate also doubles.
Arrheinus has studied the 
quantitative relationship 
between temperature, energy 
of activation and rate constant 
of a reaction.
 Fig. (11.6) Kinetic energy distributions for a reaction  mixture at two different
temperatures. The size of the shaded areas under the curves are proportional
to the total fraction of the molecules that possess the minimum activation energy.3211 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.5.6 Arrhenius Equation
 Arrhenius equation explains the efect of temperature on the rate constant of a reaction. The 
rate constant ‘k’ for many simple reactions is found to vary with temperature.
According to Arrhenius:
   -Ea/RTk=Ae ........ (1)
 So, ‘k’ is exponentially related to activation energy (Ea) and temperature (T). R is general gas 
constant and e is the base of natural logarithm. The equation shows  that the increase in temperature, 
increases the rate constant and the reactions of high activation energy have low ’k’ values. 
Animation 11.20: Effect of Temperature on Rate of R eaction
Source & Credit : dynamicscience3311 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
The factor ‘A’ is called Arrhenius constant and it depends upon  the collision frequency of the reacting 
substances. This equation helps us to determine the energy of activation  of the reaction as well. 
For this purpose, we take natural log of Arrhenius equation, whic h is expressed as n. The base of 
natural log is e and its value is 2.718281.
Now, take natural log on both sides
   -Ea/RTnk = n(Ae )
or   -Ea/RTnk = nA + ne 
or   -Enk = nA + neRT 
Since   ne = 1    (log of a quantity with same base is unity)
Therefore  a-Enk =  + nA                    ...........  (2)RT
 The equation (1) is the equation of straight line, and from the sl ope of straight line Ea can be 
calculated. In order to convert this natural log into common log of ba se 10, we multiply the n term 
with 2.303.
   a-E2.303 log k =  + 2.303 log ART   (The base of common log is 10)
Dividing the whole equation by 2.303
 a-Elog k =  + log A                   ..... ......  (3)2.303RT
 This equation (3) is again the equation of straight line resembl ing.
    y = -mx + c
 Where ‘m’ is slope of straight line and ‘c’ is the intercept of s traight line. Temperature is inde -
pendent variable in this equation while rate constant k is dependent va riable. The other factors like 
Ea, R and A are constants for a given reaction.
 When a graph is plotted between 1
T on x-axis and log k on y-axis, a straight line is obtained 
with a negative slope. Actually, aE
RT has negative sign so the straight line has two ends in second and   
fourth quadrants, Fig. (11.7).3411 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
The slope of the straight line is measured by taking the tangent of th at angle θ which 
this straight line makes with the x-axis. To measure the slope, dr aw a line parallel to 
x-axis and measure angle θ . Take tan θ which is slope. This slope is equal to a-E
2.303R .
    a-ESlop = 2.303 R
Therefore   aE = -Slop x 2.303 R                        ..........(4)
 The straight lines of diferent reactions will have diferent slopes a nd diferent ‘Ea’ values. The 
units of slope are in kelvins (K).
Since    -1
-1 -1J molSlop =  = K2.303 JK mol
Fig. (11.7) Arrhenuis plot to calculate the energy of activation3511 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Example 3:
 A plot of Arrhenius equation Fig (11.8 ) for 
the thermal decompositions of N2O5 is shown 
in the following igure. The slope is found to be 
-5400 K. Calculate the energy of activation of 
this reaction.
Solution:
(i)  The reaction is
 25 2 2N O 2NO +1/2O ฀
Animation 11.21: Arrhenius Equation
Source & Credit : wps
Fig. (11.8) Arrhenius plot for decomposition of N2O53611 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
 Slope of the straight line = -5400 K
 Equation used,   Ea = -slope x 2.303 R
     R = 8.3143JK-1mol-1
 Putting the values,
  Ea =-(-5400K)x 2.303 x 8.3143JK-1mol-1
  Ea= +103410 J mol-1
  Ea = 103.410 kJ mol-1
 Hence, the decomposition of N2O needs 103.4kJmol-1 energy more than the average energy 
to cross the energy barrier Fig.(11.9)
 
11.6 CATAL YSIS
 A catalyst is deined as a substance which alters the rate of a chemical reaction, but remains 
chemically unchanged at the end of the reaction. A catalyst is of ten present in a very small proportion. 
For example, the reaction between H2 and O2 to form water is very slow at ordinary temperature, 
but proceeds more rapidly in the presence of platinum. Platinum a cts as a catalyst. Similarly, KClO3 
decomposes much more rapidly in the presence of a small 
amount of MnO2. HCl is oxidised to Cl2 in the presence of CuCl2.
Fig. (11.9) Potential energy diagram of N2O5 decomposition3711 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
   2CuCl
2 224HCl+O 2H O+2Cl   →
 The process, which takes place in the presence of a catalyst, is called catalysis.  A catalyst 
provides a new reaction path with a low activation energy barrier, F ig.(11.10). A greater number of 
molecules are now able to get over the new energy barrier and reaction ra te increases.
Fig. (11.10) Catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions.
Animation 11.22: CATALYSIS
Source & Credit : lsa.umich3811 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Types of Catalysis
(a)  Homogeneous Catalysis
(b)  Heterogeneous Catalysis
(a)  Homogeneous Catalysis
 In this process, the catalyst and the reactants are in the same pha se and the reacting system 
is homogeneous throughout. The catalyst is distributed uniformly thr oughout the system. For 
example:
(i).  The formation of SO3 (g) from SO2 (g) and O2 (g) in the lead chamber process for the manufacture 
of sulphuric acid, needs NO (g) as a catalyst. Both the reacta nts and the catalyst are gases.
    NO(g)
22 32SO (g) + O (g)  2SO (g) ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀
(ii).  Esters are hydrolysed in the presence of H2SO4. Both the reactants and the catalyst are in the 
solution state.
   +
3
24HO
3 25 2 3 25 H SOCH COOC H (aq) + H O( )  CH COOH(aq) + C H OH(aq ) ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀
(b)  Heterogeneous Catalysis
 In such systems, the catalyst and the reactants are in diferent p hases. Mostly, the catalysts 
are in the solid phase, while the reactants are in the gaseous or li quid phasse. For example:
(i).  Oxidation of ammonia to NO in the presence of platinum gau ze helps us to manufacture 
HNO3.
   Pt(s)
32 24NH (g) + 5O (g)  4NO(g) + 6H O(g) ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀ ฀ ฀฀
(ii)  Hydrogenation of unsaturated organic compounds are catalys ed by inely divided Ni, Pd or Pt.
   Ni(s)
2 2 2 33CH   =  CH (g) + H (g)  CH  - CH (g) ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀3911 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.6.1 Characteristics of a Catalyst
 There are many types of catalysts with varying chemical composi tions, but the following 
features are common to most of them.
1. A catalyst remains unchanged in mass and chemical comp osition at the end of reaction. It may 
not remain in the same physical state. MnO2 is added as a catalyst for the decomposition of 
KClO3 in the form of granules. It is converted to ine powder at the end of rea ction. It has been 
found in many cases that the shining surfaces of the solid cata lyst become dull.
2. Sometimes, we need a trace of a metal catalyst to afect very large am ount of reactants. For 
example, 1 mg of ine platinum powder can convert 2.5 dm3 of H2 and 1.25 dm3 of O2 to water. 
Dry HCl and NH3 don’t combine, but in the presence of trace of moisture, they give dense white 
fumes of NH4Cl. Thousands of dm3 of H2O2, can be decomposed in the presence of 1 g of colloidal 
platinum.
3. A catalyst is more afective, when it is present in a inely divi ded form. For example, a lump of 
platinum will have much less catalytic activity than colloidal platinum. In the hydrogenation of 
vegetable oils inely divided nickel is used. 
4.  A catalyst cannot afect the equilibrium constant of a reaction but it helps the equilibrium to be 
established earlier. The rates of forward and backward steps ar e increased equally.
5. A catalyst cannot start a reaction, which is not thermodynamic ally feasible. It is now considered 
that a catalyst can initiate a reaction. The mechanism of a catal ysed reaction is diferent from 
that of an uncatalysed reaction.
For example:
(i)  The presence of CO as an impurity with hydrogen decreases the catalytic activity of catalyst in 
the Haber’s process for the manufacture of NH3.
(ii) The manufacture of H2SO4 in the contact process needs platinum as a catalyst. The traces of  
arsenic present as impurities in the reacting gases makes platin um inefective. That’s why arsenic 
puriier is employed in the contact process.4011 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.6.2 Activation of Catalyst
 Such a substance which promotes the activity of a catalyst is ca lled a promotor or activator. It 
is also called “catalyst for a catalyst”. For example :
(i)  Hydrogenation of vegetable oils is accelerated by nickel. The c atalytic activity of nickel can be 
increased by using copper and tellurium.
(ii)  In Haber’s process for the manufacture of ammonia, iron is used as a catalyst. If small amounts 
of some high melting oxides like aluminum oxide, chromium oxide or rare earth oxides are added, 
they increase the eiciency of iron.
Negative Catalysis
 When the rate of reaction is retarded by adding a substance, then it is said to be a negative 
catalyst or inhibitor. For example, tetraethyl lead is added to petrol,  because it saves the petrol 
from pre-ignition.
Animation 11.23: Characteristics of a Catalyst
Source & Credit : logilent4111 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Autocatalyst
In some of the reactions, a product formed acts as a catalyst. Thi s phenomenon is called auto- 
catalysis. For example:
(i)  When copper is allowed to react with nitric acid, the reaction  is slow in the beginning. It gains the 
speed gradually and inally becomes very fast. This is due to th e formation of nitrous acid during 
the reaction, which accelerates the process.
(ii) The reaction of oxalic acid with acidiied KMnO4 is slow at the beginning, but after sometimes, 
MnSO4 produced in the reaction makes it faster.  
 2+Mn
4 24 2 24 4 2 22KMnO  + 3H SO  + 5(COOH) K SO  + 2MnSO  + 10CO  + 8H O   →
11.6.3. Enzyme catalysis
 Enzymes are the complex protein molecules and catalyze the organic reactions in the living 
cells. Many enzymes have been identiied and obtained in the pure c rystalline state. However, the 
irst enzyme was prepared in the laboratory in 1969. For example:
Animation 11.24: Activation of Catalyst
Source & Credit : dynamicscience4211 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
(i)  Urea undergoes hydrolysis into NH3 and CO2 in the presence of enzyme urease present in 
soyabean.
  2O
    HN฀
C Urease
22 3 2NH +H O 2NH +CO   →
(ii)  Concentrated sugar solution undergoes hydrolysis into gluc ose and fructose by an enzyme 
called invertase, present in the yeast.
  Inertase
12 22 11 2 6 12 6 6 12 6C H O  + H O C H O  + C H O   →
(iii)  Glucose is converted into ethanol by the enzyme zymase present in  the yeast.
   Zymase
6 12 6 2 5 2 C H O 2C H OH + 2CO   →
 Enzymes have active centres on their surfaces. The molecules of a su bstrate it into-their 
cavities just as a key its into a lock Fig. (11.11). The subs trate molecules enter the cavities, form the 
complex, reactants and the products get out of the cavity immediately. M ichaulis and Menter(1913) 
proposed the following mechanism for enzyme catalysis
 E + S ES P + E → ฀
Where 
 E = enzyme,  S = substrate (reactant)
 ES = activated complex,  P = product
Fig. (11.11) Lock and key model of enzyme catalysis4311 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
11.6.4 Characteristics of Enzyme Catalysis
 The role of enzyme as catalysts is like inorganic heterogeneous cata lysts. They are unique in 
their eiciency and have a high degree of speciicity. For example:
(i)  Enzymes are the most eicient catalysts known and they lower the energy of activation of a 
reaction.
(ii) Enzymes catalysis is highly speciic, for example, ur ease catalyses the hydrolysis of urea only 
and it cannot hydrolyse any other amide even methyl urea.
Animation 11.25: Enzyme catalysis
Source & Credit : kth4411 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
(iii) Enzyme catalytic reactions have the maximum rates at an opti mum temperature.
(iv) The pH of the system also controls the rates of the enzyme catalysed  reaction and the rate 
passes through a maximum at a particular pH, known as an optimum pH. The activity of enzyme 
catalyst is inhibited by a poison.
(v) The catalytic activity of enzymes is greatly enhanced by the pr esence of a co-enzyme or activator.
Animation 11.26: Characteristic of Enzyme
Source & Credit : tdmu4511 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1. The studies concerned with rates of chemical reactions and fac tors that afect the rates of chemical 
reactions and the mechanism of reactions constitute the subject matter of reaction kinetics.
2. The rate of a reaction is the change in the concentration of a reac tant or a product divided 
by the time taken for the reaction. The rate of reaction between two speciic time intervals 
is called the average rate of reaction. While the rate at any one instan t during the interval is 
called the instantaneous rate. Rate constant of a chemical reaction is  rate of reaction when the 
concentrations of reactants are unity.
3. Order of reaction is the sum of exponents of the concentation terms in  the rate expression 
of a chemical reaction.The exponents in the expression may or may n ot be diferent from 
the coeicients of the chemical equation. Order of a reaction may be zer o, whole number or 
fractional.
4. Half life period of a reaction is the time required to convert 50% of the reactants into products. 
Half-life period of any reaction is inversely proportional to the ini tial concentration raised to the 
power one less than the order of that reaction.
5. The step which limits how fast the overall reaction can proceed, is known as the rate determining 
step.
6. Determination  of the rate of a chemical reaction involves the measuremen t of the concentration 
of reactants or products at regular time intervals during the progres s of reaction. The change 
in concentration of reactants and products can be determined by both physical and chemical 
methods.
7. The efective collisions between the colliding species will take pla ce only when the reactant 
molecules possess minimum amount of energy, which is called the energy of activation. Moreover, 
proper orientation is also necessary.
8 . All those factors, which change the number of efective collision s per second, afect the rate of 
chemical reaction. Some of the important factors are, nature and conc entration of reactants, 
surface area, light, and temperature and catalyst.
9. A catalyst is  a substance, which alters the rate of a chemi cal reaction, but itself remains chemically 
unchanged at the end of reaction. The process when the catalyst and the reactants are in the 
same phase is said to be a homogenous catalysis. In case of heterog eneous catalysis, the catalyst 
and the reactants are in diferent phases. A substance, which pr omotes the activity of a catalyst, 
is called promoter or activator. In certain reactions, a product form ed acts as a catalyst, the 
phenomenon is called auto-catalysis.
10. Enzymes are the complex protein molecules, which catalyze the r eactions in the living cells.4611 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q.1  Multiple choice questions.
(i)  In zero order reaction, the rate is independent of
a)  temperature of reaction.   (b)  concentration of reactants,
c)  concentration of products   (d)  none of these
(ii)  If the rate equation of a reaction 2A + B → products is, rate =k[A]2 [B], and A is present in large 
excess, then order of reaction is
 a) 1   (b) 2   (c) 3   (d) none of these
(iii)  The rate of reaction
a)  increases as the reaction proceeds.
b)  decreases as the reaction proceeds.
c)  remains the same as the reaction proceeds.
d)  may decrease or increase as the reaction proceeds.
(iv)  With increase of 10°C temperature the rate of reaction doubles. T his increase in ate of reaction 
is due to:
a)  decrease in activation energy of reaction.
b)  decrease in the number of collisions between reactant molecules.
c)  increase in activation energy of reactants.
d)  increase in number of efective collisions.
(v)  The unit of the rate constant is the same as that of the rate of reac tion in
(a)  irst order reaction.  (b)  second order reaction.
(c)  zero order reaction.  (d)  third order reaction.
Q.2  Fill in the blanks with suitable words.
(i)  The rate of an endothermic reaction_______ with the increase i n temperature.
(ii)  All radioactive disintegration nuclear reactions are of____ ____ order
(iii)  For a fast reaction the rate constant is relatively and half  - life is ______ .
(iv)  The second order reaction becomes______ if one of the reactants i s in large excess.
(v)  Arrhenius equation can be used to ind out________of a reacti on.4711 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Q.3  Indicate true or false as the case may be.
(i)   The half life of a irst order reaction increases with temper ature.
(ii)  The reactions having zero activation energies are instantaneous.
(iii)  A catalyst makes a reaction more exothermic.
(iv)  There is diference between rate law and the law of mass action .
(v)  The order of reaction is strictly determined by the stoichiometry of  the bdanced equation.
Q4. What is chemical kinetics? How do you compare chemical ki netics with clemical equilibrium 
and thermodynamics.
Q5. The rate of a chemical reaction with respect to products is wri tten with positive sign, but with 
respect to reactants is written with a negative sign. Explain it with  reference to the following 
hypothetical reaction.
    aA + bB cC + dD →
Q6 . What are instantaneous and average rates? Is it true that the in stantaneousrate of a reaction at 
the beginning of the reaction is greater than average rate and beomes fa r less than the average 
rate near the completion of reaction?
Q7. Diferentiate between
(i)  Rate and rate constant of a reaction
(ii ) Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyses
(iii) Fast step and the rate determining step
(iv) Enthalpy change of reaction and energy of activation of reaction
Q8. Justify the following statements
(i)  Rate of chemical reaction is an ever changing parameter uner  the given conditions.
(ii) The reaction rate decreases every moment but rate constant ‘k’ of the reation is a constant 
quantity, under the given conditions.
(iii) 50% of a hypothetical irst order reaction completes in one hour . The renaming 50% needs 
more than one hour to complete.
(v) The radioactive decay is always a irst order reaction.4811 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
(iv) The unit of rate constant of a second order reaction is dm3 mol-1s-1, but the uit of rate of reaction 
is mol dm-3s-1S.
(vi) The sum of the coeicients of a balanced chemical equation is not neessarily important to give 
the order of   a reaction.
(vii ) The order of a reaction is obtained from the rate expression of a reaction anthe rate expression 
is obtained from the experiment.
Q9. Explain that half life method for measurement of the order of a reaction can help us to measure 
the order of even those reactions which have a fractional order.
Q10. A curve is obtained when a graph is plotted between time on x-a xis and concentration on 
y-axis. The measurement of the slopes of various points give us the in stantaneous rates of 
reaction. Explain with suitable examples.
Q11.  The rate determining step of a reaction is found out from the m echanism of that reaction. 
Explain it with few examples.
Q12.  Discuss the factors which inluence the rates of chemical r eactions.
Q.13. Explain the following facts about the reaction.
    2 22 2NO(g) + 2H (g) 2H O(g) + N (g) →
(i)  The changing concentrations of reactants, change the rates of this reaction.
(ii)  Individual orders with respect to NO and H2 can be measured.
(iii)  The overall order can be evaluated by keeping the concentration of one of the substances 
constant.
Q14. The collision frequency and the orientation of molecules are nec essary conditions for 
determining the proper rate of reaction. Justify the statement.
Q.15. How does Arrhenius equation help us to calculate the energy of  activation of a reaction?4911 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
Q16. Deine the following terms and give examples
(i)  Homogeneous catalysis   (ii)  Heterogeneous catalysis
(iii)  Activation of a catalyst   (iv)  Auto-catalysis
(v)  Catalytic poisoning    (vi)  Enzyme catalysis
Q17.  Briely describe the following with examples
(i)  Change of physical state of a catalyst at the end of reaction.
(ii)  A very small amount of a catalyst may prove suicient to car ry out a reaction.
(iii)  A inely divided catalyst may prove more efective.
(iv)  Equilibrium constant of a reversible reaction is not changed  in the presence of a catalyst.
(v)  A catalyst is speciic in its action.
Q18.  What are enzymes? Give examples in which they act as catal yst. Mention the characteristics 
of enzyme catalysis.
Q19.  In the reaction of NO and H2, it was observed that equimolecular mixture of gases at 340.5 
mm Hg pressure was half changed in 102 seconds. In another experiment with an initial pressure 
of 288 mm of Hg, the reaction was half completed in 140 seconds.  Calculate the order of reaction. 
(Ans:2.88)
Q20. A study of chemical kinetics of a reaction
  A + B Products →
gave the following data at 25 °C. Calculate the rate law.
(Ans: second order)
Q21.  Some reactions taking place around room temperature have activati on energies around 50kJ 
mol-1.
(i)  What is the value of the factor  -E
o RTe  at 25 C ?
(Ans: 1.72x10-9)[A] [B] Rate
1.00
2.00
1.000.15
0.15
0.24.2 x 10-6
8.4 x 10-6
5.6 x 10-65011 REACTION KINETICS eLearn.Punjab
(ii)  Calculate this factor at 35 °C anat 45 0C and note1 the increase in this factor for every 10 0C 
rise in temperature. 
(Ans:3.31x10-9)
(iii)  Prove  that for every 10°C rise in of temperature, the factor dou bles and so rate constant also 
doubles. 
(Ans:6.12x10-9)
Q22.  H2 and I2 react to produce HI. Following data for rate constant at 
various temperatures (K) have been collected.
(i)  Plot a graph between 1
T on x-axis and log k on the y-axis.
(ii)  Measure the slope of this straight line and calculate the ener gy for 
activation of this reaction.
(Ans: 8326.32,160.6kJmol-1)Temp.
(K)Rate constant
(cm3 mol-1 s-1) (K)
500
550
600
650
700-46.814 x 10
-22.64 x 10
00.56 x 10
07.31 x 10
066.67 x 10APPENDIX
Animation: Appendix
Source & Credit: olivergoodwin2Appendix eLearn.Punjab
Physical 
QuantityName
in UnitsSymbol Physical 
QuantityName
in UnitsSymbol
Length meter m Volume cubic meter 3m
Mass kilogram kg Length angstromo
A(0.1nm)
Time second s Pressure atmosphereatm(101.325kPa)
Temperature Kelvin K torrmmHg(133.32Pa)
Electrical current ampere A Energy caloriecal(4.184J)
Luminous intensity candela cd electron volt-19ev(1.6022x10 J)
Amount of substance mole mol Temperature degree celsiusoC (K-273.15)
Concentration molarityM(mol/L or
3mol/dm )
Physical 
QuantityName
in UnitSymbol
Energy joul22J(kg-m /s )
Frequency hertzHz(cycles/s)
Force newton2N(kg-m/s )
Pressure pascal2
aP (N/M )
Power wattW(j/s)
Electrical charge coulombC(amp-s)
Electrical potential voltV(j/c)
Electrical resistance ohmÙ(v/amp)
Electrical conductance siemensS(amp/V)
Electrical capacitance faradF(C/V)Table A.1 The SI System
Table A.2 Common Derived Units in SI3Appendix eLearn.Punjab
Fraction and Multiplies for Use in SI
exa, E 1018deci, d 10-1
peta, P 1015centi, c 10-2
tera, T 1012milli, m 10-3
giga, G 109micro, m10-6
mega, M 106nano, n 10-9
kilo, k 103pico, p 10-12
hecto, h 102femto, f 10-15
deca, da 101atto, a 10-18
Speed of light in vacuum (c) 8c = 2.99792458x10 m/s
Charge on an electron (qe)-19
eq  = 1.6021892x10 C
Rest mass of electron (me)-28
em  = 19.109534x10 g
-4
em  = 5.4858026x10 amu
Rest mass of proton (mp)-24
pm  = 1.6726485x10 g
pm  = 1.00727647amu
Rest mass of neutron (mn)-24
nm  = 1.6749543x10 g
nm  = 1.00865012amu
Faraday’s constant (F) F = 96484.56 C/mol
Planck’s constant (h) -34h = 6.626176x10 J-s
Ideal gas constant (R) R = 0.0820568 L-atm/mol-K
R = 8.31441 J/mol-K
Atomic mass unit (amu)-241 amu = 1.6605655x10 g
Boltzmann’s constant (k) 23k = 1.380662x10  J/K−
Aogadro’s constant (NA)23 -1
aN  = 6.022045x10 mol
Rydberg constant (RH)7 -1
HR  = 1.09737318x10 m
-2 -1= 1.09737318x10 nm
Molar Volume of a gas at s.t.p-2 3 -1
mV  = 2.24x10 m mol
Heat capacity of water C = 75.276J/mol-KTableA.3 Fraction and Multiplies for Use in SI
Table A.4 Values of Selected Fundamental Constants4Appendix eLearn.Punjab
Energy71 J = 0.2390 cal = 10 erg
1 cal = 4.184 J
-19lev/atom = 1.6021892x10 J/atom = 96.484 k J/mol
Temperature K = C + 273.15
0C = 5/9 (F-32)
0F = 9/5 (C) + 32
Pressure1am = 760 mmHg = 760 torr = 101.325kPa
Mass1kg = 2.2046 lb
1lb = 453.59 g = 0.45359 kg
1oz = 0.06250 lb = 28.350 g
1ton = 2000 lb = 907.185 kg
1tonne (metric) = 1000 kg = 2204.62 lb
Volume 31 mL = 0.001 L = 1 cm
1 oz (fluid) = 0.031250 qt = 0.029573 L
1 qt = 0.946326 L
1 gal = 0.946 L
Length 1 mile = 1.60934 km
1 in. = 2.45 cm
10mm = 1 cm
1000mm = 1 m
1000m = 1 km
1m = 39.370 in.
o-10 -8A = 10  m = 10  cmTable A.5 Selected Conversion Factors5Appendix eLearn.Punjab
F-Cl-Br-I-O2-S2-OH-NO3-CO32-SO42-CH3COO-
+HS S S S S s S S s S S
+NaS S S S S S S S S S S
+KS S S S S S S S S S S
+
4NHS S S S - S S S S S S
+AgS I I I I I - S I I I
2+MgI S S S I d I S I S S
2+CaI S S S I d I S I I S
2+BaI S S S s d s S I I S
2+Fes S S S I I I S s S S
3+FeI S S - I I I S I S I
2+CoS S S S I I I S I S S
2+NIs S S S I I I S I S S
2+Cus S S - I I I S I S S
2+Zns S S S I I I S I S S
2+Hgd S I I I I I S I d S
3+Cds S S S I I I S I S S
2+SnS S S s I I I S I S S
2+PbI I I I I I I S I I S
2+Mns S S S I I I S I S S
3+AlI S S S I d I S - S
Key : S  = Soluble in water    I = Insoluble in water  (less than 1g/l00g H2O)
 s = Slightly soluble in water  d = Decompose in wate rTable A.6 Solubility TableGLOSSARY
Animation: Glosssary
Source & Credit: speedyromeo2Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Absolute zero:The  temperature of -273.16 °C at which the volume of a gas 
theoretically becomes zero is called absolute zero. It is taken as 
Zero on the kelvin scale of temperature.
Actual yield:Actual yield is the  amount of the product actually obtained in a  
chemical reaction.
Amorphous solids:Those  solids in which the structural units i.e. atoms, ions 
or molecules are ixed in their positions but are not regularly 
arranged.
Anisotropy:It is the variation of a certain physical property with direction.
Atomic absorption 
spectrum:When a  beam of white light is passed through the vapours or a 
gas, the element absorbs certain wavelengths, while rest of the 
wavelengths are passed through it. The spectrum of this radiation 
is called atomic absorption spectrum. The missing wavelengths 
appear as dark lines in the spectrum.
Atomic emission spectrum:It is the  spectrum formed by the elements or their compounds 
when they are heated in a lame. The spectrum consists of a 
series of bright lines with a dark background.
Atomic radius:If an atom  is assumed to be spherical then the atomic size means 
the average distance between the nucleus of the atom and its 
outermost shell. This distance is called atomic radius and it c an 
not be measured precisely.
Auf-bau principle:The  electrons should be illed in energy sub-levels in order of 
increasing energy values. The electrons are irst placed in Is, th en 
2s, then 2p and so on.
Average Rate of Reaction:The rate  of reaction between two speciic time intervals is called 
average rate of reaction.
Avogadro’s law:Equal  volumes of all ideal gases at same temperature and 
pressure contain equal number of molecules.
Avogadro’s number:Avogadro’s  number is the number of atoms, molecules or ions 
in one gram atom of an element, one gram mole of a compound 
or one gram ion of an ionic substance.
Azimuthal quantum 
number:The  quantum number that deines the shape of the orbital of an 
electron.
Balmer series:A series of lines present in the visible region of hydrogen spectru m 
formed when an electron jumps from higher orbits to the 2nd 
orbit.3Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Boiling point:The temperature at which the vapour pressure of a liquid 
becomes equal to the external pressure, is called boiling point 
of the liquid.
Bond energy:The  average amount of energy required to break all bonds of a 
particular type in one mole of the substance.
Bond order:Half  of the diference between the number of bonding electrons 
and anti-bonding electrons.
Boyle’s law (1662):The  volume of the given mass of a gas is inversely proportional to 
the pressure of that gas when the temperature is kept constant.
Brackett series:A  series of lines in the infra red region of hydrogen spectrum 
formed when the electron jumps from higher orbits to the fourth 
orbit.
Catalyst:The  substance which alters the rate of a chemical reaction but 
remains chemically unchanged at the end of reaction.
Cathode rays:Negatively  charged rays which originate from the cathode when 
electricity is passed through a gas at very low pressure.
Charles’s law (1787):The  volume of a given mass of a gas is directly proportional to 
absolute temperature when the pressure is kept constant.
Chromatography:It is a method used for the separation of components of a mixture.
Colligative properties:These  are the properties of solutions that depend only on the 
number of solute and solvent molecules or ions.
Common ion effect:The decrease in the solubility of an electrolyte in a solution in the 
presence of a common ion is called common ion efect.
Conjugate acid of a base:The  positively charged ion produced by the acceptance of a 
proton by a base is the conjugate acid of the base.
Conjugate base of the acid:The negatively charged ions or a neutral species produced by 
the release of proton is the conjugate base of the compound 
releasing the proton.
Covalent crystals:Those  crystals in which the non-metallic atoms are held together 
in a network of single covalent bonds.
Covalent radius:It is half the length of a covalent bond between tw’o atoms.
Critical temperature:That  temperature of a gaseous substance above which it cannot 
be converted into the liquid state no matter how much the 
pressure is applied on it.
Crystal lattice or space 
lattice:A  particular three dimensional arrangement of particles i.e. 
atoms, ions or molecules in a crystal is. called a crystal la ttice or 
space lattice.4Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Crystal:A  three dimensional shape bounded by plane surfaces which 
intersect at deinite angles with each other.
Crystallization:A  process in which a crude product is puriied and obtained in 
the form of crystals.
Dalton’s law of partial 
pressures:Total  pressure of a mixture of gases is equal to the sum of the 
partial pressures of all the gases in the mixture.
Diffusion of gases:The  spontaneous mixing of the molecules of diferent gases by 
random motion and collisions to form homogeneous mixture 
is called gaseous difusion.
Dipole moment:It is  a product of charge and the distance between the positive 
and negative centers present in a compound.
Dipole:Partial separation of charges on a bond between two atoms.
Dipole-Dipole forces:The  attractive forces between the positive end of one molecule 
and the negative end of the another polar molecule are called 
dipole-dipole forces.
Discharge tube:A glass  tube containing a gas at low pressure and is provided  
with electrodes for the passage of electricity through the gas.
Effusion of gases:With the passage of the gas molecules one by one without 
collisions through a pin hole in their container into an evacuated 
space is called efusion.
Electrochemical Cell:It  is a system consisting of electrodes that dip into an electrolyte 
and in which a chemical reaction either uses or generates 
electric current.
Electrode potential:It  is the tendency of a metal to form its ions or to get deposited 
on the metal when a metal is dipped into the solution of its 
own ions.
Electrolysis:It  is the decomposition of ionic compounds by the passage of 
electric current.
Electrolytic conduction:It  is the passage of electric current through electrolytes present 
in the fused state or in the solution form.
Electron afinity:Attraction of nucleus of an atom for an extra electron.
Electronegativity:Tendency  of a bonded atom to attract the shared electron pair 
towards itself.
Empirical formula:That  formula of a compound which is based on the formula 
unit and gives the simple whole number ratio of the atoms in 
the molecule is called empirical formula.5Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Endothermic reactions:The chemical reactions, which are accompanied by 
absorption of heat, are called endothermic reactions.
Enthalpy or heat of solution:It is  deined as the heat change when one mole of a substance 
is dissolved in a speciied number of moles of solvent at a 
given temperature.
Enthalpy:The  total heat content of a system is termed as enthalpy of 
a system.
Equilibrium constant:Equilibrium constant is the ratio of forward rate constant and 
backward rate constant for a reaction at given condition.
Evaporation:The  spontaneous change of a liquid into its vapours at the 
surface of liquid at a given temperature is called evaporation.
Exothermic reaction:The  chemical reactions, which are accompanied by the 
evolution of heat, are called exothermic reactions.
First law of thermodynamics:It states  that energy can neither be created nor be destroyed 
but can be changed from one form to another.
Graham ‘s law of diffusion:The  rate of difusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the 
square root of the density of the gas or the molar mass of 
gas under the given conditions of temperature and pressure.
Half-life period:Half-life period of  a reaction is the time required to convert 
50% of the reactants into products.
Heisenberg’s uncertainty 
principle:It is not  possible to measure simultaneously the exact 
position and momentum of an electron in an atom.
Hess’s law of constant heat 
summation:If a  chemical change takes place by several diferent routes, 
the overall energy change is the same, regardless of the 
route by which the chemical change occurs, provided the 
initial and inal conditions are the same.
Hund’s rule:If  degenerate orbitals are available and more than one 
electrons are to be placed in them, they should be placed 
in separate orbitals with the same spin rather than putting 
them in the same orbital with opposite spins.
Hybridization:Mixing  of orbitals to form new orbitals with speciic 
orientations.
Hydration:The  process in which water molecules surround and interact 
with solute molecules or ions is called hydration.6Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Hydrogen bonding:Hydrogen  bondingis the electrostatic force of attraction 
between hydrogen atom (bonded to a small highly 
electronegative atom) and the electronegative atom of 
another molecule.
Ideal gas:A gas which obeys the gas laws at all temperatures and 
pressures.
Ideal solutions:Those solutions which obey Raoult’s law.
Instantaneous Rate of Reaction:The rate of reaction at any one instant during the interval.
Intermolecular forces:The  attractive forces which exist between individual particles 
i.e. atoms, ions and molecules.
Ion dipole interactions:The electrostatic forces of attraction between an ion (positive 
or negative) and the polar molecules of the solvent.
Ionic crystals:Those crystals in which the oppositely charged ions are held 
together by an ionic bond.
Ionic radius:It is the radius of an ion considered spherical in shape.
Ionization Energy:It is the minimum amount of energy required to remove the 
most loosely bound electron from an isolated gaseous atom.
Irreversible reaction:An irreversible reaction is that in which products of the 
reaction do not react to form the original reactants under 
the same set of conditions.
Kinetic molecular theory of 
gases:A model of gases which explains the physical behaviour of 
gases.
Law of mass action:The  rate at which a substance reacts is proportional to its 
active mass and the rate of a chemical reaction is proportional 
to the product of the active masses of the reacting substances.
Le-Chatelier’s principle:If a system at equilibrium is disturbed, it behaves in such a  
way as to nullify the efect of that disturbance.
Limiting reactant:Limiting reactant is that reactant which is present in lesser 
amount and controls the amount of the products in a 
chemical reaction.
Liquid crystal:That crystalline state of a substance which exists between two 
temperatures i.e. the melting temperature and the clearing 
temperature.7Glossary eLearn.Punjab
London dispersion forces:The  attractive forces between the temporary dipole in one 
molecule and temporary induced dipole in an adjacent molecule 
are called London dispersion forces, adjacent molecule are 
called London dispersion forces.
Lowry-Bronsted Concepts 
of acids and bases:Acids are those species which give proton or have a tendency 
to give proton. Bases are those species which accept proton or 
have a tendency to accept proton.
Lyman series:A series of lines in the ultraviolet region of hydrogen spectrum 
which are obtained when electron jumps from higher orbits to 
the irst orbit of hydrogen atom.
Magnetic quantum number:The  quantum number that deines the orientation of an orbital 
in a magnetic ield.
Mass spectrometer:It is the instrument employed to separate positively charged 
particles on the basis of their m/e values and get the record on 
the photographic plate or electrometer.
Metallic crystals:Those  crystals in which the metal atoms are held together by 
metallic bonds.
Molality (m):It is the number of moles of the solute dissolved in 1000 grams 
(1 kg) of the solvent.
Molar volume:The volume occupied by one mole of an ideal gas at standard  
temperature and pressure - 22.414 dm3 is called the molar 
volume.
Molarity (M):It is the number of moles of the solute dissolved per dm3 of the 
solution.
Mole fraction:Mole fraction of any component in a mixture is the ratio of the 
number of moles of it to the total number of moles of all the 
components present in the solution.
Mole:A quantity which contains Avogadro’s number of units i.e. atoms,  
molecules, ions or whatever under consideration is called a 
mole.
Molecular crystals:Those crystals in which the molecules are held together by van 
der Waal’s forces.
Molecular formula:A chemical formula which gives the total number of atoms 
present in a molecule of a substance.8Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Molecular ions:Those  ions which are produced by the removal of one or more 
electron or electrons from the molecule of a substance are called 
molecular ions. They are mostly positive and rarely negative.
Non-ideal solution:Those solutions which do not obey Raoult’s law.
Non-spontaneous 
Process:It is the  reverse of the spontaneous process. It does not take place 
on its own and does not occur in nature.
Orbit:An orbit is a deinite path  at a deinite distance from the nucleus  in 
which the electron revolves around the nucleus; actually an orbit 
indicates an exact position or location of an electron in an atom.
Orbital:A region around the nucleus where the probability of inding the 
electron is maximum, s, p, d and f are diferent types of orbital s 
which exist in an atom.
Order of Reaction:It is the  sum of the exponents of the concentration terms in the 
rate expression of a chemical reaction.
Oxidation Number:It is the  apparent  charge on an atom of an element in a compound 
or a radical.
Paper Chromatography:It is a technique  of partition chromatography in which the station ary 
phase is water adsorbed on paper and mobile phase is usually an 
organic liquid.
Partial pressure:The  pressure exerted by an individual gas in a gaseous mixtur e is 
called the partial pressure of that gas.
Parts per million:It is  deined as the number of the parts (by weight or volume) of a  
solute per million parts (by weight or volume) of the solution.
Paschen series:A series of lines in the infra red region of hydrogen spectrum which 
results from the transitions of electron from higher orbits to the 
third orbit.
Pauli’s exclusion 
principle:According to this principle, it is impossible for two electrons r esiding 
in the same orbital of a poly electron atom, to have the same values 
of four quantum numbers. Thus two electrons in the same orbital 
should have opposite spins.
Percentage yield:Actual yield%yield= x100Theoretical yield
Pfund series:A series of lines in the infra red region of hydrogen spectrum which 
results from the transition of electron from higher orbits to the 
ifth orbit.9Glossary eLearn.Punjab
pH of the solution:The negative log of [H+] is called pH of the solution.
Phase:Every  sample of matter with uniform properties and a ixed 
composition is called a phase.
pi (p) bondA bond formed by  the parallel overlap of the two planar p-orbital s 
present on the adjacent atoms which are already bonded with a ct 
bond.
pKw:It is the negative log of dissociation constant of water.
pOH of the solution:The negative log of [OH-] is called pOH of the solution.
Polarizability:Polarizability is the  quantitative measurement of the extent to 
which the electronic cloud can be polarized.
Positive rays or canal 
rays:Rays travelling in a direction  opposite to the cathode rays in a 
discharge tube. They consist of positively charged ions formed by  
the ionization of gas molecules with the passage of cathode rays.
Principal quantum 
number:The  quantum number that deines the shell of an electron in an 
atom. Its symbol is n.
Quantum Numbers:These are the sets of numerical values which give the acceptable 
solutions.
Raoult’s law:The  lowering of the vapour pressure of a solvent by a solute, at a 
given temperature, is directly proportional to the mole fraction of 
solute.
Rate Constant:It is the rate of reaction when the concentrations of the reactants are u nity.
Rate of Reaction:It is deined as the change in concentration of a reactant or a prod uct 
divided by the time taken for the change.
Real gas:A gas which  does not obey the gas laws at all temperatures and 
pressures.
Redox Reaction:A chemical reaction in which oxidation and reduction take place.
Relative abundance of 
isotope:The  percentage of isotope of an element in comparison to other 
isotopes of the same element is called relative abundance of 
isotope.
Relative atomic mass:Relative atomic  mass of an atom of an element is the mass as 
compared with the mass of one atom of carbon taken as twelve. It 
is expressed in a.m.u.10Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Retardation Factor (Rf):A component of a mixture may  be identiied by a speciic 
retardation factor called R, value. It is related to the partition 
coeicient by the following relationship,
fDistance travelled by a component from t he original spotR=Distance travelled by a solvent from the  original spot
Reversible reaction:A reversible reaction is that one  in which products of a reacti on 
can react to form the original reactants.
Sigma ( s)-bond:A bond formed by the linear overlap of atomic orbitals.
Solubility:It is the number of grams of a solute that can be dissolved in 
100 grams of the solvent to  prepare a saturated solution at a 
particular temperature.
Solvent Extraction:It is a technique in which a solute can  be separated from a 
solution by shaking the solution with a solvent in which the 
solute is more soluble and the added solvent does not mix 
with the solution.
Spectrum:A band of seven colours formed by the  dispersion of the 
components of white light, when it is passed through a prism.
Spontaneous Process:Process, which  takes place on its own without any outside 
assistance and moves from a non-equilibrium state towards 
an equilibrium state, is termed as spontaneous process.
Standard Electrode Potential:When a metal is dipped into the solution of its own ions 
having concentration 1.0 mol per dm3 or a gas is passed at a 
pressure of one atmosphere through a solution of 1.00 mol 
per dm3 strength of its ions having an inert electrode, the 
potential developed is called standard electrode potential. The  
temperature of the system is maintained at 250 C.
Standard Enthalpy of 
Atomization:It is the change  of enthalpy when one mole of gaseous atoms 
is formed form the element under standard conditions.
Standard Enthalpy of 
Combustion:It is the  amount of heat produced when one mole of the 
substance is completely burnt in excess of oxygen under 
standard conditions.
Standard Enthalpy of 
Formation:It is the  change of enthalpy when one mole of a compound is 
formed from its elements under standard conditions.11Glossary eLearn.Punjab
Standard Enthalpy of 
Neutralization:It is the  amount of heat evolved when one mole of hydrogen ions H+ 
from an acid react with one mole of hydroxide ion OH- from an alkali 
under standard conditions.
Standard temperature 
and pressure:The standard temperature is 00C (273 K) and the standard pressure is 
1 atm or 760 mm of Hg or 760 torr or 101325 Nm-2.
State Function:It is a  macroscopic property of a system which has some deinite 
value for each state and which is independent of path in which th e 
state is reached.
Stoichiometry:Stoichiometry is  the branch of chemistry which deals with the 
quantitative relationship between reactants and products in a 
balanced chemical equation.
Sublimation:It is a process in which a solid, when heated, vapourizes dir ectly without 
passing through the liquid state.
Surroundings:The remaining portions around a system are called surroundin gs.
System:Anything  (materials) under test or under consideration, is termed  as 
a system.
Theoretical yield:The oretical yield is the amount of the products calculated from the 
balanced chemical equation.
Thermochemistry:The study of heat changes during a chemical reaction is know n as 
thermochemistry.
Unit cell:The  smallest unit of the volume of a crystal which when repeated  in 
three dimensions can generate the structure of the entire crystal.
Vacuum distillation:The  process of heating a liquid under reduced pressure to cha nge it 
into vapours at a lower temperature and then condensing the vapours 
to a liquid.
van der Waal’s 
equation:It is  an equation of state of gases that modiies the ideal gas equati on 
to represent more accurately the behaviour of real gases.
Vapour pressure:The  pressure exerted by the vapours of a liquid in equilibrium with 
the liquid at a given temperature.
Water of 
crystallization:Those  water molecules, which have combined with some compounds 
as they are crystallized from aqueous solutions is called water of  
crystallization or water of hydration.