CHAPTER
4    LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS
Animation 4.1: Solid, Liquid,  Gas
Source & Credit: everythingscientiic24 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
INTRODUCTION
 The existence of matter in our surrounding in the form of gases, liquids and solids is due to 
diference of interacting forces among the constituent particles.
4.1 INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
 To understand the properties of liquids and solids, we need to know  the kinds of intermolecular 
forces present in them and their relative strength. It is important to rea lize that the attraction 
between the molecules is much weaker than the attraction between atoms withi n a molecule. In a 
molecule of HCl, there is a covalent bond between H and Cl which is  due to the mutual sharing of 
electrons. Both atoms satisfy their outermost shells and it is their ir m need to remain together, 
hence this linkage is very strong.
 HCl molecules in the neighbourhood attract each other, but the forces  of attraction are 
weak. These forces are believed to exist between all kinds of atoms and molecules when they are 
suiciently close to each other. Such intermolecular forces are called  van der Waals forces and they 
have nothing to do with the valence electrons.
These intermolecular forces bring the molecules close together and give p articular physical 
properties to the substances in gaseous, liquid and solid states. F our types of such forces are 
mentioned here.
1. Dipole-dipole forces
2. Ion-dipole forces
3. Dipole-induced dipole forces
4. Instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces or London dispersion forces34 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.1.1 Dipole-dipole Forces
 In case of HCl molecule both atoms difer in electronegativity. Chlorin e being more 
electronegative, develops the partial negative charge and hydrogen develops th e partial positive 
charge. So, whenever the molecules are close to each other, they tend to lin e up. The positive end 
of one molecule attracts the negative end of the other molecule and these electrosta tic forces of 
attraction are called dipole-dipole forces. However, thermal energy cau ses the molecules not to 
have a perfect alignment.
Animation 4.2 : Intermolecular forces
Source & Credit: intermolecularforcess44 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 Anyhow, there is a net attraction between the polar molecules. These forc es are called as 
dipole-dipole forces and they are approximately one percent as efective a s a covalent bond. 
The strength of these forces depends upon the electronegativity diference between  the bonded 
atoms and the distance between the molecules. The distances between molecul es in the gaseous 
phase are greater so these forces are very 
weak in this phase. In liquids these forces 
are reasonably strong. The examples of 
the molecules which show dipole-dipole 
attractions are numerous. Two of these 
are given below i.e., for HCl and CHCl3 
(chloroform) Fig (4.1).
 Greater the strength of these dipole-
dipole forces, greater are the values of 
thermodynamic parameters like melting 
points, boiling points, heats of vapourization 
and heats of sublimation.
4.1.2  Dipole-induced Dipole Forces
 Sometimes, we have a mixture of substances containing polar and n on-polar molecules. The 
positive end of the polar molecule attracts the mobile electrons of the nearby  non-polar molecule. 
In this way polarity is induced in non-polar molecule, and b oth molecules become dipoles. These 
forces are called dipole-induced dipole forces or as Debye forces. T he following igure makes the 
idea clear Fig (4.2).
Show Fig. (4.1) Dipole - dipole forces present in HC1
molecules and chloroform (CHCl3) molecules.
Fig (4.2) Dipole-induced dipole interactions54 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.1.3  Instantaneous Dipole-induced Dipole Forces or London Dispersion Forces 
Intermolecular forces among the polar molecules, as discussed in section 4.1.1 are very easy to 
understand. But the forces of attraction present among the non-polar mol ecules like helium, 
neon, argon, chlorine and methane need special attention because under  normal conditions 
such molecules don’t have dipoles. We know that helium gas can be liqueied under appropriate 
conditions. In other words forces of attraction operate among the atoms of helium which cause 
them to cling together in the liquid state. 
 A German physicist Fritz London in 1930 ofered a simple expla nation for these weak attractive 
forces between non-polar molecules. 
 In helium gas, the electrons of one atom inluence the moving electrons of  the other atom. 
Electrons repel each other and they tend to stay as far apart -as pos sible. When the electrons of 
one atom come close to the electron of other atom, they are pushed away from ea ch other. In this 
way,a temporary dipole is created in the atom as shown in the Fig (4.3). The result is that, at any 
moment, the electron density of the atom is no more symmetrical. It has m ore negative charge on 
one side than on the other. At that particular instant, the helium atom becomes a dipole. This is 
called instantaneous dipole.
This instantaneous dipole then disturbs the electronic cloud of the other  nearby atom. So,a dipole 
is induced in the second atom. This is called induced dipole. The momentary force of attraction 
created between instantaneous dipole and the induced dipole is called instantaneous dipole-
induced dipole interaction or London force.Fig. (4.3) Instantaneous dipole-induced
dipole attractions between helium atoms.64 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 
It is a very short-lived attraction because the electrons keep moving. Thi s movement of electrons 
cause the dipoles to vanish as quickly as they are formed. Anyhow , a moment later, the dipoles will 
appear in diferent orientation and again weak attractions are developed . 
 London forces are present in all types of molecules whether polar or non-polar, but they are very’ 
signiicant for non-polar molecules like Cl2, H2 and noble gases (helium, neon,etc.)
4.1.4 Factors Affecting the London Forces
London forces are weaker than dipole- dipole interactions. The strength  of these forces depend upor 
the size of the electronic cloud of the atom or molecules. When the size of the atom or molecule is 
large then the dispersion becomes easy and these forces become more promi nent. The elements 
of the zero group in the periodic table are all mono-atomic gases. Th ey don’t make covalent bonds 
with other atoms because their outermost shells are complete. Their boilin g points increase down 
the group from helium to radon. Boiling points of noble gases are g iven in Table (4.1)
The atomic number increases down the group and the outermost electrons m ove away from the 
nuclei. The dispersion of the electronic clouds becomes more and more easy. So the polarizability 
of these atoms go on increasing.
Animation 4.3 : London Dispersion Forces
Source & Credit: dynamicscience74 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
  Polarizability is the quantitative 
measurement of the extent to which 
the electronic cloud can be polarized or 
distorted. When we say that a species (atom, 
molecule or ion) is polarized, it means 
that temporary poles are created. This is 
possible if electronic cloud can be disturbed 
or distorted. This increased distortion of 
electronic cloud creates stronger London 
forces and hence the boiling points are 
increased down the group.
 Similarly, the boiling points of halogens 
in group VII-A also increase from luorine to 
iodine Table (4.1). All the halogens are non-
polar diatomic molecules, but there is a big 
diference in their physical states at room 
temperature. Fluorine is a gas and boils at 
-188.1 °C, while iodine is a solid at room 
temperature which boils at +184.4 °C. The 
polarizability of iodine molecule is much 
greater than that of luorine.
 Another important factor that afects the strength of London forces is the number of atoms 
in a non-polar molecule. Greater the number of atoms in a molecule, g reater is its polarizability. Let 
us discuss the boiling points of saturated hydrocarbons. These h ydrocarbons have chain of carbon 
atoms linked with hydrogen atoms. Compare the length of the chain for  C2H6 and C6H14. 
 They have the boiling points - 88.6 °C and 68.7 C,respectively.  This means that the molecule with 
a large chain length experiences stronger attractive forces. The reason  is that longer molecules have 
more places along its length where they can be attracted to other molecules . It is very interesting to 
know that with the increasing molecular mass of these hydrocarbons , they change from gaseous to 
liquid and then inally become solids. The Table (4.2) gives th e boiling points and the physical states 
of some hydrocarbons.
 Table(4.1) Boiling points of halogens and 
noble gases84 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Name B.P
0C (1 atm)Physical state
at S.T.PName B.P
0C (1 atm)Physical state
at S.T.P
Mathane
Ethane
Propane
Butane-164
-88.6
-42.1
0.5Gas
Gas
Gas
GasPentane
Hexane
Decane
Isodecane36.1
68.7
174.1
327Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
4.1.5 Hydrogen Bonding
 To understand hydrogen bonding, let us consider the molecule of wa ter. Oxygen is more 
electronegative element as compared to hydrogen, so water is a polar molecu le. Hence there will 
be dipole-dipole interactions between 
partial positively charged hydrogen atoms 
and partial negatively charged oxygen 
atoms. Actually, hydrogen bonding is 
something more than simple dipole-
dipole interaction. Firstly, oxygen atom 
has two lone pairs. Secondly hydrogen 
has suicient partial positive charge. Both 
the hydrogen atoms of water molecule 
create strong electrical ield due to their 
small sizes. 
The oxygen atom of the other molecule 
links to form a coordinate covalent bond 
with hydrogen using one of its lone pairs 
of electrons. Fig (4.4). 
 Thus loose bond formed is deinitely 
stronger than simple dipole-dipole 
interaction. Because of the small size of the hydrogen atom, it can ta ke part in this type of bonding. 
This bonding acts as a bridge between two electronegative oxygen atoms. Hence hydrogen bonding 
is  the electrostatic force of a atraction between a highly electronegative a tom and partial positively 
charged hydorgen atom.Table (4.2) Boiling points and physical states of s ome hydrocarbons
Fig (4.4) Hydrogen bonding in water.94 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 The electronegative atoms responsible for creating hydrogen bonding ar e luorine, oxygen, 
nitrogen and rarely chlorine. The strength of hydrogen bond is gen erally twenty times less than 
that of a covalent bond.
It is not advisable to limit the hydrogen bonding to the above-m entioned el ectronegative atoms. 
The three chlorine atoms in chloroform are responsible for H- bondin g with other molecules. 
These atoms deprive the carbon atom 
of its electrons and the partial positively 
charged hydrogen can form a strong 
hydrogen bond with oxygen atom of 
acetone Fig (4.5). 
Animation 4.4 : hydrogen bonding
Source & Credit: stream1
Fig (4.5) Hydrogen bonding between
chloroform and acetone104 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
The hydrogen bonding present in the 
molecules of ammonia and those of 
hydrolouric acid can be depicted as follows 
Fig (4.6).The molecules of HF join with each 
other in a zig- zag manner.
 The exceptional, low acidic strength of 
HF molecule as compared to HCl, HBr and 
HI is due to this strong hydrogen bonding, 
because the partial positively charged 
hydrogen is entrapped between two highly 
electronegative atoms.
4.1.6 Properties and Application of Compounds Contain ing Hydrogen Bonding
1. Thermodynamic Properties of Covalent Hydrides
Our discussion shows that hydrogen bonding exists in compounds  having partial positively charged 
hydrogen and highly electronegative atoms bearing partial negative ch arge. Obviously such 
intermolecular attractions will inluence the physical properties l ike melting and boiling points. Let 
us compare the physical properties of hydrides of group IV-A, V -A, VI-A and VII-A. The graphs are 
plotted between the period number of the periodic table on x-axis and boi ling points in kelvin on 
y-axis Fig (4.7).
Fig (4.6) Hydrogen bonding in
NH3 and HF molecules.114 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 
 A  look at the boiling points of hydrides of group IV-A convinces  us, that they have low boiling 
points as compared to those of group V-A, VI-A, VII-A. The reason  is that these elements are 
least electronegative. CH4 has the lowest boiling point because it is a very small molecule an d its 
polarizability is the least. 
 When  we consider the hydrides of group V-A, VI-A, VII-A then  NH3, H20 and HF show maximum 
boiling points in the respective series. The reason is, the enhancec el ectronegative character of N, 
0 and F. That is why, water is liquid at room temperature, but H2S and H2Se are gases.
 It  is interesting to know that the boiling point of water seems to be mor e afected by hydrogen 
bonding than that of HF Fluorine is more electronegative than oxygen. S o, we should expect 
H-bonding in HF to be stronger than that in water and as a resul t the boiling point of HF should be 
higher than that of H20. However, it is lower and the reason is that the luorine atom can ma ke only 
one hydrogen bond with electropositive hydrogen of a neighboring molecul e. Water can form two 
hydrogen bonds per molecule, as it has two hydrogen atoms and two l one pairs on oxygen atom.
Ammonia can form only one hydrogen bond per molecule as it has on ly one lone pair.
Fig (4.7) A Graph between period number and the boili ng points of hydrides of IV-A, V-A, VI-A 
and VII-A group elements.124 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 The  boiling point of HBris slightly higher than that of HCl.  It means that chlorine is 
electronegative enough to form a hydrogen bond. Sometimes it is thought that HCl has a strong 
dipole-dipole interaction but in reality, it is a border line case.  The hydrides of fourth period GeH4, 
AsH3, H2Se, HBr show greater boiling points than those of third period due to greater size and 
enhanced poiarizabilities.
2. Solubility of Hydrogen- Bonded Molecules
 Water  is the best example of H-bonded system. Similarly ethyl al cohol (C2H5OH) also has the 
tendency to form hydrogen bonds. So, ethyl alcohol can dissolve in w ater because both can form 
hydrogen bonds with each other. Similarly carboxylic acids a re also soluble in water, if their sizes 
are small. Hydrocarbons are not soluble in water at all, becaus e they are non-polar compounds 
and there are no chances of hydrogen bonding between water and hydr ocarbon molecules. 
 
3. Structure of Ice
 The molecules of water have tetrahedral structure. Two lone pairs of el ectrons on oxygen 
atom occupy two corners of the tetrahedron. In the liquid state, water mol ecules are extensively 
associated with each other and these associations 
break and are reformed because the molecules of 
water are mobile. When the temperature of water 
is decreased and ice is formed then the molecules 
become more regular and this regularity extends 
throughout the whole structure. Empty spaces 
are created in the structure as shown in the 
following Fig (4.8b). That is why when water 
freezes it occupies 9% more space and its density 
decreases. The result is that ice loats on water. 
The structure of ice is just like that of a diamond 
because each atom of carbon in diamond is at 
the center of tetrahedron just like the oxygen of 
water molecule in ice, Fig (4.8 b).
Fig (4.8 a) Structure of liquid water134 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 The lower density of ice than liquid water at 0 
°C causes water in ponds and lakes to freeze from 
surface to the downward direction. Water attains 
the temperature of 4°C by the fall of temperature 
in the surrounding. As the outer atmosphere 
becomes further cold, the water at the surface 
becomes less dense. This less dense water below 
4 °C stays on the top of slightly warm water 
underneath. A stage reaches when it freezes. This 
layer of ice insulates the water underneath for 
further heat loss. Fish and plants survive under 
this blanket of ice for months. 
 Keeping the whole discussion in view we are 
forced to believe that the pattern of life for the plants and animals wou ld have been totally diferent 
in the absence of hydrogen bonding in water.
4. Cleansing Action of Soaps and Detergents
 Soaps and detergents perform the cleansing action because the polar part of their molecules 
are water soluble due to hydrogen-bonding and the non-polar parts r emain outside water, because 
they are alkyl or benzyl portions and are insoluble in water.
5. Hydrogen Bonding in Biological Compounds and Food  Materials
Hydrogen bonding exists in the molecules of living system. Proteins are the important part of living 
organisms. Fibres like those found in the hair, silk and mus cles consist of long chains of amino 
acids. These long chains are coiled about one another into a spira l. This spiral is called a helix. Such 
a helix may either be right handed or left handed. In the case of right handed helix the groups like 
>N H and > C = 0 are vertically adjacent to one another and they a re linked together by hydrogen 
bonds. These H-bonds link one spiral to the other. X-ray analysi s has shown that on the average 
there are 27 amino acid units for each turn of the helix, Fig (4 .9 a). 
 Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) has two spiral chains. These are coiled about each other on a 
common axis. In this way, they give a double helix. This is 1 8-20 Å in diameter. They are linked 
together by H-bonding between their sub units, Fig (4.9 b). 
Fig (4.8 b) Structure of ice144 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 The food materials like carbohydrates include glucose, fructose a nd sucrose. They all have 
-OH groups in them which are responsible for hydrogen bonding in them.
6. Hydrogen Bonding in Paints, Dyes and Textile Mat erials
 One of the most important properties of paints and dyes is their adhes ive action. This property 
is developed due to hydrogen bonding. Similar type of hydrogen bondi ng makes glue and honey as 
sticky substances.
 We use cotton, silk or synthetic ibres for clothing. Hydrogen bondi ng is of vital importance 
in these thread making materials. This hydrogen bonding is res ponsible for their rigidity and the 
tensile strength.
Fig (4.9 a) Hydrogen bonding
Fig (4.9 b) Hydrogen bonding in
DNA double helix154 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.2.0  EVAPORATION
 In order to understand evaporation, we have to examine the movement of molecul es in liquids. 
The molecules of a liquid are not motionless. The energy of molecules is not equally distributed. 
The molecules which have low kinetic energy move slowly, while others with high kinetic energy 
move faster. If one of the high speed molecules reaches the surface, it may escape the attractions 
of its neighbouring molecules and leaves the bulk of the liquid. This spontaneous change of a 
liquid into its vapours is called evaporation and it con tinues at all temperatures. 
Evaporation causes cooling. The reason is that when high energy mol ecules leave the liquid and 
low energy molecules are left behind, the temperature of the liquid fal ls and heat moves from the 
surrounding to the liquid and then the temperature of the surrounding  also falls.
Animation 4.5 : Evaporation
Source & Credit: stem164 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
There  are many factors which control the rate of evaporation of a liq uid. Since evaporation occurs 
from liquid surface, so if surface area is increased then mor e molecules are able to escape and 
liquid evaporates more quickly. For liquids having same surfa ce area, the rate of evaporation is 
controlled by the temperature and the strength of intermolecular forces. 
 At high temperature, the molecules having greater energy increase and  so rate of evaporation 
increases. Similarly, if intermolecular forces are weak, the ra te of evaporation is faster. For example, 
gasoline, whose molecules experience weaker London forces of attraction, evaporate much faster 
than water.
4.2.1  Vapour Pressure 
 When the molecules of a liquid leave the open surface, they are mixed up with air above the 
liquid. If the vessel is open these molecules go on leaving the surfac e. But if we close the system 
the molecules of liquid start gathering above the surface. These molecu les not only collide with the 
walls of the container, but also with the surface of the liquid as  well. 
There are chances that these molecules are recaptured by the surface of  liquid. This process is 
called condensation. The two-processes i.e., evaporation and condensati on continue till a stage 
reaches when the rate of evaporation becomes equal to the rate of condensation.  This is called the 
state of dynamic equilibrium Fig (4.10). So the vapour pressure of a liquid is a pressure exerted by 
the vapours of the liquid in equilibrium with the liquid at a g iven temperature.
       ฀ ฀฀฀ ฀฀Liquid Vapour
Fig (4.10) Evaporation of a liquid and establishment
of dynamic equilibrium between liquid and its vapours.174 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 The number of molecules leaving the surface is just equal 
to the number of molecules coming back into it at a constant 
temperature. The molecules which are in the liquid state at any 
moment may be in vapour state in the next moment.
 The magnitude of vapour pressure does not depend upon the 
amount of liquid in the container or the volume of container. It also 
does not depend on surface area of a liquid. The larger surface area 
also presents a larger target for returning the molecules, so the 
rate of condensation also increases.
 
Vapour Pressure Increases with Temperature
  The values of vapour pressures of various liquids depend fairl y upon the nature of 
liquids i.e. on the sizes of molecules and intermolecular forces, but the most important parameter 
which controls the vapour pressure of a liquid is its temperature. At an elevated temperature, the 
kinetic energy of molecules is enhanced and capability to leave the s urface increases. 
It causes the increase of vapour pressure. Table(4.3) 
shows change in vapour pressure of water at diferent 
temperatures. The Table (4.3) shows that increases 
of vapour pressure goes on increasing for the same 
diference of temperature from 0°C to 100°C for water. There is 
increase of vapour pressure from 4.579 torr to 9.209 torr for chan ge 
of temperature from 0°C to 10°C. But the increase is from 527.8 torr  
to 760 torr when temperature changes from 90°C to 100°C.
The diference in the strength of intermolecular forces in diferent 
liquids is directly related to their vapour pressures at a particu lar 
temperature. The stronger the intermolecular forces the lower 
the vapour pressure. The following Table (4.4) shows that at 20 ° C 
isopentane has the highest vapour pressure, while glycerol has the 
lowest.Tablc (4.3) Vapour pressures of water 
(torr) at various temperatures
Temperature
(0C)Vapour
Pressure
(Torr)
0 4.579
10 9.209
20 17.54
30 31.82
37 47.07
40 55.32
50 92.51
60 149.4
70 233.7
80 355.1
90 527.8
100 760.0
Animation 4.6 : Vapour Pressure
Source & Credit: mecalux184 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.2.2 Measuremerr of Vapour Pressure 
  There are many methods for the measurement of vapour pressure of a l iquid. One of 
the important methods is described in the following paragraph.
Manometric Method
Manometric method is comparatively an accurate method. The liquid w hose vapour pressure is 
to be determined is taken in a lask placed in a thermostat, as show n in the Fig(4.11). One end 
of the tube from the lask is connected 
to a manometer and the other end 
is connected to a vacuum pump. The 
liquid is frozen with the help of a 
freezing mixture and the space above 
the liquid is evacuated. In this way, the 
air is removed from the surface of the 
liquid alongwith the vapours of that 
liquid. The frozen liquid is then melted 
to release any entrapped air. Liquid is 
again frozen and realeased air To is 
evacuated. This process is repeated 
many times till almost all the air is 
removed.Name of compound Vapour pressure
at 20 0C (torr)
Isopentane 580
Ethyl ether 442.2
Chloroform 170
Carbon Tetrachloride 87
Ethanol 43.9
Mercury 0.012
Glycerol 0.00016Table (4.4) Vapour pressure of some 
important liquids at 20°C
Fig. (4.11) Measurement of vapour pressure of a
in the heights of the columns of-Hg in liquid by manome tric method194 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 Now the liquid is warmed in the thermostat to that temperature at which  its vapour pressure in 
the lask is to be determined. Diference in the heights of the columns of- Hg in liquid by manometric 
method the two limbs of the manometer determines the vapour pressure of the li quid. 
 The column of mercury in the manometer facing the vapours of the li quid is depressed. The 
other column, which faces the atmospheric pressure, rises. Actual ly, the pressure on the surface of 
the liquid in the lask is equal to the sum of the atmospheric press ure and the vapour pressure of 
liquid. For this reason, the column of manometer facing the liqui d is more depressed than facing 
the atmosphere, and it is given by the following equation.
    P = Pa + ∆h
Where   P = Vapour pressure of the liquid at one atm pressure.
    P= Atmospheric pressure.
    ∆h = Diference in the heights of the mercury levels in the two limbs
     of the manometer, giving us the vapour pressure of liquid.  
4.2.3 Boiling Point
 When  a liquid is heated, the vapour pressure goes on increasing . A stage reaches when 
the vapour pressure of the liquid becomes equal to the external atmospheri c pressure. This 
temperature is called the boiling point of the liquid. 
The reason for this is that the bubbles of vapours 
which are formed in the interior of the liquid have 
greater internal pressure than atmospheric pressure 
on the surface of liquid. This thing makes the bubble 
to come out of the liquid and burst upon the surface. 
Thus a constant stream of bubbles comes out at the 
boiling point. 
 When a liquid is heated, the kinetic energy of 
its molecules increases and hence the temperature 
also increases. At the boiling point, the kinetic energy 
of the molecules becomes maximum and any further 
heating at this stage will not increase the temperature.
Animation 4.7 : Boiling Point
Source & Credit: chem204 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
This heat will only be utilized to break the intermolecular forces a nd convert the liquid into its 
vapours. The amount of heat required to vapourize one mole of a liquid at its boiling point is 
called its molar heat of vapourization.  The molar heat of vapourization of water is 40.6 kjmol-1. 
The boiling points of some commonly available liquids at one atmosp heric pressure are shown in 
the Table (4.5).
 The Fig. (4.12) shows the variation of vapour pressure of water, ethyl alcohol, ethylene glycol 
and diethylether with temperature. It shows that the liquids reach up to their boiling points when their 
vapour pressures are equal to 760 torr at 
sea level. The way these curves start at 0 
0C is interesting. Water takes start at 4.8 
torr while diethyl ether at around 200 torr. 
This is due to diference in the strengths 
of their intermolecular forces. The curve  
for water goes alongwith temperature 
axis to a greater extent at the beginning 
as compared to ether. It means that water 
can hardly overcome its intermolecular 
forces at low temperatures. It is clear 
from the curves that the vapour pressure 
increases very rapidly when the liquids 
are closer to their boiling points.Liquid B.P (0C) Liquids B.P (0C)
Acetic Acid 118.50 Carbon tetrachloride 76.50
Acetone 56.00 Ethanol 78.26
Aniline 184.4 Naphthalene 218.00
Benzene 80.15 Phenol 181.80
Carbon disulphide 46.30 Water 100.00Table (4.5) Boiling points of some 
common liquids at 760 torr.
Fig (4.12) Vapour pressures(torr) of four common liquids s hown as a 
function of temperature(°C).214 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.2.4 Boiling Point and External Pressure 
 We have already explained that when vapour pressure of a liquid becomes equal to the 
external pressure then the liquid boils, so when external pressure i s changed, its boiling point 
will also be changed. A liquid can be made to boil at any temp erature by changing the external 
pressure. When the external pressure is high the liquid requires greater amount of heat to equalize 
its vapour pressure to external pressure. In this way boiling poin t is raised. Similarly, at a lower 
external pressure a liquid absorbs less amount of heat and it boi ls at a lower temperature.
 For  example, water shows B.P of 120 °C at 1489 torr pressure and boils at 25 °C at 23.7 torr. 
Water boils at 98 °C at Murree hills due to external pressure of 70 0 torr while at the top of Mount 
Everest water boils at only 69 0C 323 torr.
 We  can increase the external pressure artiicially on the surfac e of boiling water by using a 
pressure cooker. Pressure cooker is a closed container. The vapours of  water formed are not allowed 
to escape. In this way, they develop more pressure in the cooker and the boiling temperature 
increases. As more heat is absorbed in water, so food is cooked qui ckly under increased pressure.
 Liquids  can be made to boil at low temperatures, where they can b e distilled easily. This process 
is called vacuum distillation. Vacuum distillation has many  advantages. It decreases the time for 
the distillation process and is economical because less fuel is r equired. The decomposition of many 
compounds can be avoided e.g. glycerin boils at 290 °C at 760 torr pressure but decomposes at this 
temperature. Hence, glycerin cannot be distilled at 290 °C. Under va cuum, the boiling temperature 
of glycerin decreases to210 0C at 50 torr. It is distilled at this temperature without decomposition 
and hence can be puriied easily.
4.2.5 Energetics of Phase Changes
 Whenever, matter undergoes a physical change, it is always acc ompanied by an energy 
change. This change in energy is the quantitative measurement of the diference in the strength of 
intermolecular forces. 
 The change in energy is mostly in the form of heat.  If a physical or a chemical change 
takes place at a constant pressure, then the heat change d uring this process is also called 
enthalpy change.  This is denoted by  ΔH. These enthalpy changes are usually exp ressed per mole 
of the substances. Three types of enthalpy changes are associated wi th usual physical changes.224 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 (i) Molar Heat of Fusion (ΔHf) 
 It is the amount of heat absorbed by one mole of a solid when it melts  into liquid form at its 
melting point. The pressure, during the change is kept one atmospher e.
(ii) Molar Heat of Vapourization (ΔHv) 
 It is the amount of heat absorbed when one mole of a liquid is cha nged into vapours at its 
boiling point. The pressure, during the change is kept one atmosph ere.
(iii) Molar Heat of Sublimation (ΔHs)
 It is the amount of heat absorbed when one mole of a solid sublimes to give one mole of 
vapours at a particular temperature and one atmospheric pressure.
 All these enthalpy changes are positive, because they are endothermic processes.
4.2.6 Energy Changes and Intermolecular Attractions
 When a solid substance melts then atoms, molecules or ions undergo relatively small changes 
in intermolecular distances and the potential energy also undergoes a  small change. But when a 
liquid evaporates, then larger changes in intermolecular distances  and in potential energy takes 
place. So ΔH of vapourization of a substance is greater than ΔH of  fusion. The values of ΔHs are even 
larger than ΔHv because attractive forces in solids are stronger than those in liqui ds.
 The values of ∆Hv and ∆Hs tell us directly the energy needed to separate molecules from each 
other. So from these values, we can compare the strengths of intermolecula r forces in diferent 
compounds.
 From the following Table (4.6), we are convinced that ΔHv for H20, NH3 and S02 are reasonably 
high due to polar nature of molecules. ΔHV for iodine is the highes t amongst its family members 
due to its greater polarizability. Similarly, hexane (C6H14) has the highest ΔHv value amongst the 
hydrocarbons due to larger size of its molecules. Actually, the Lon don dispersion forces in I2 and 
C6H14 are suiciently strong and these are responsible for such a behavi our.234 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 
4.2.7 Change of State and Dynamic Equilibrium
 Whenever, a change of state occurs the system moves towards the condition of dynamic 
equilibrium. Dynamic equilibrium is a situation when two oppos ing changes occur at equal rates. 
Being a chemist, we should know that the concept of dynamic equili brium is the fate or the ultimate 
goal of all the reversible chemical reactions and all the physica l changes.
 At 0°C, solid water (ice) exists in dynamic equilibrium wi th liquid water.
     ฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀ ฀฀0oCice water
4.3 Liquid Crystals
 Whenever we study the properties of crystalline solids, we come to know that the pure solids 
melt sharply. The temperature remains constant at the melting point un til all the solid melts.Substance ΔHv (kJ/mol)
H2O +40.6
NH3+21.7
HCl +15.6
SO2+24.3
F2+5.9
Cl2+10.00
Br2+15.00
I2+22.00
CH4+8.60
C2H6+15.1
C3H8+16.9
C6H1430.1Table (4.6) Heats of 
Vaporization 
of some substances244 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 In 1888, Frederick Reinitzer, an Austrian botanist discovered a  universal property. He was 
studying an organic compound cholesteryl benzoate. This compound turns milky liquid at 145°C 
and becomes a clear liquid at 179°C. When the substance is cool ed, the reverse process occurs. 
This turbid liquid phase was called liquid crystal. 
 Uptil now, it has been reported that, there are many crystalline soli ds which melt to a turbid 
liquid phase, before inally melting to a clear liquid. These tu rbid liquid phases can low as liquids. 
They have the properties like liquids as surface tension, viscosity,  etc. But it is very interesting to 
know that the molecules of such turbid liquids possess some degree of  order as well. It means that 
these turbid liquids resemble crystals in certain properties and the most important properties are 
optical ones. These turbid liquids are hence called liquid cry stals. So, a liquid crystalline state 
exists between two temperatures i.e. melting temperat ure and clearing temperature.  A 
crystalline solid may be isotropic or anisotropic, but liquid c rystals are always anistropic.
     ฀ ฀฀ ฀ ฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀ ฀฀ Crystal Liquidcrystal Liquid
 From  1888 to until about 30 years ago, liquid crystals were largely a laboratory curiosity. But 
now they have found a large number of applications. 
 Those  substances which make the liquid crystals are often comp osed of long rod like molecules. 
In the normal liquid phase, these molecules are oriented in random directions. In liquid crystalline 
phase, they develop some ordering of molecules. Depending upon the nature of ordering, liquid 
crystals can be divided into nematic, smectic and cholesteric. 
 The  properties of liquid crystals are intermediate between those of cr ystals and isotropic 
liquids. They have the luidity of the liquids and the optical pr operties of the crystals.
Uses of Liquid Crystals
 Due to the remarkable optical and electrical properties, liquid cry stals ind many practical 
applications. Many organic compounds and biological tissues behave as liquid crystals. The unique 
properties of liquid crystals have intrigued the scientists since th eir discovery, nearly hundred years 
ago. Some of their important uses are as follows.
 (i) Like solid crystals, liquid crystals can difract li ght. When one of the wavelengths of white 
light is relected, from a liquid crystal it appears coloured. A s the temperature changes, the distances 
between the  layers of the molecules of liquid crystals change. Ther efore, the colour of the relected 
light changes accordingly.  Thus liquid crystals can he used as temperature sensors.254 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 (ii) Liquid  crystals are used to ind the point of potential fai lure in electrical circuits. Room 
thermometers also contain liquid crystals with a suitable temperatur e range. As the temperature 
changes, igures show up in diferent colours.
 (iii) Liquid  crystalline substances are used to locate the veins , arteries, infections and tumors. 
The reason is that these parts of the body are warmer than the surroun ding tissues. Specialists can 
use the techniques of skin thermography to detect blockages in veins an d arteries. When a layer 
of liquid crystal is painted on the surface of the breast, a tumor  shows up as a hot area which is 
coloured blue. This technique has been successful in the early d iagnosis of breast cancer.
 (iv) Liquid crystals are used in the display of electrical d evices such as digital watches, calculators 
and  laptop computers. These  devices operate due to the fact that temperatur e, pressure and 
electro-magnetic  ields easily afect the weak bonds, which hold mol ecules together in liquid 
crystals.
 (v) In chromatographic separations, liquid crystals are used  as solvents.
 (vi) Oscillographic and TV displays also use liquid cr ystal screens.264 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
SOLIDS
4 .4 INTRODUCTION
 Solids are those substances which are rigid, hard, have deinite shape and deinite 
volume.  The atoms, ions and molecules that make up a solid are closely pa cked. They are held 
together by strong cohesive forces. The constituent atoms, ions or molecules of solids cannot move 
at random. There exists a well ordered arrangement in solids. 
4.4.1 Types of Solids
 Solids can be classiied on the basis of the regular arrangemen ts of constituent atoms, ions 
or molecules. There are two types of solids in this respect.
(i) Crystalline Solids
 Those solids in which atoms, ions or molecules are arranged in  a deinite three dimensional 
pattern are called crystalline solids This recurring regular geometrical pattern of structure extends 
three dimensionally.
(ii) Amorphous Solids
 All solids are not crystalline .The word amorphous means shap eless. Amorphous substances 
are those whose constituent atoms, ions, or molecules  do not possess a regular orderly 
arrangement. The best examples are glass, plastics, rubber, glue, etc. These substances have solid 
state properties and virtually complete maintenance of shape and volume.  But they do not have an 
ordered crystalline state.
 Many crystalline solids can be changed into amorphous solids  by melting them and then 
cooling the molten mass rapidly. In this way the constituent partic les do not ind time to arrange 
them selves.274 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 A long range regularity does not exist in amorphous solids but th ey can possess small regions 
of orderly arrangements. These crystalline parts of otherwise amorphous solids are known as  
crystallites.  Amorphous solids don’t have sharp melting points that is why pa rticles of glass soften 
over a temperature range and can be moulded and blown into various s hapes. They do not possess 
deinite heats of fusion.
4.4.2 Properties of Crystalline Solids
1.  Geometrical Shape
 All the crystalline solids have a deinite, distinctive geometrical s hape due to deinite and 
orderly arrangement of atoms, ions or molecules in three-dimensional space. For a given crystal, 
the interfacial angles, at which the surfaces intersect, are alwa ys the same no matter in which shape 
they are grown. The faces and angles remain characteristic even w hen the material is ground to a 
ine powder.
2. Melting Points 
 Crystalline solids have sharp melting points and can be identi ied from their deinite melting 
points.
3.  Cleavage Planes 
 Whenever the crystalline solids are broken they do so along deinite pl anes. These planes 
are called the cleavage planes and they are inclined to one another at a particular angle for a given 
crystalline solid. The value of this angle varies from one solid to another solid.
4.  Anisotropy
 Some of the crystals show variation in physical propert ies depending upon the 
direction. Such properties are called anisotropic prop erties and the phenomenon is referred 
to as anisotropy. The physical properties of crystalline solids like refractive ind ex, coeicient of 
thermal expansion, electrical and thermal conductivities are sometimes  anisotropic in nature for 
some crystals.284 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
The variation in these properties with direction is due to fact that the or derly arrangement of the 
particles in crystalline solids is diferent in diferent direction s. For example, electrical conductivity 
of graphite is greater in one direction than in another. Actually el ectrons in graphite are mobile 
for electrical conduction parallel to the layers only. Therefore, its conductivity in this direction 
is far better than perpendicular to the other direction. Similarly, cleavage itself is an anisotropic 
behaviour.
5. Symmetry 
 The repetition of faces, angles or edges when a crystal  is rotated by 360° along its axis is 
called symmetry.  This an important property of the crystal and there are various types  of symmetry 
elements found in crystals like, center of symmetry, plane of symm etry and axis of symmetry, etc.
6. Habit of a Crystal 
 The shape of a crystal in which it usually grows is call ed habit of a crystal.  Crystals are 
usually obtained by cooling the saturated solution or by slow coolin g of the liquid substance. These 
are formed by growing in various directions. If the conditions for  growing a crystal are maintained, 
then the shape of the crystal always remains the same. If the condi tions are changed the shape of 
the crystal may change. For example, a cubic crystal of NaCl  becomes needle like when 10% urea is 
present in its solution as an impurity.
7.  Isomorphism
 Isomorphism is the phenomenon in which two diferent  substances exist in the same 
crystalline form.   These diferent substances are called isomorphs of each other. 
 A crystalline form is independent of the chemical nature of the atom s and depends only on 
the number of atoms and their way of combinations. 
 Mostly the ratio of atoms in various compounds are such that isomoph ism is possible. 
Their physical and chemical properties are quite diferent from ea ch other. Anyway, isomorphic 
substances crystallize together in all proportions in homogeneous mix tures. Following examples 
tell us the nature of the compound, their crystalline forms and the r atio of their atoms.294 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Isomorphs Crystalline form Atomic ratio
NaNO3, KNO3rhombohedral 1:1:3
K2SO4, K2CrO4orthorhombic 2:1:4
ZnSO4, NiSO4-do- 1:1:4
NaF, MgO cubic 1:1
Cu, Ag cubic 1:1
Zn, Cd hexagonal 1:1
The structures of the negatively charged ions like NO3-1 and CO32-, are the same. Similarly shapes of 
SO42- and CrO42- are also alike. CO32- and NO31- are triangular planar units, while SO42-  and CrO42- are 
both tetrahedral.
8. Polymorphism 
 Polymorphism is a phenomenon in which a compound exis ts in more than one 
crystalline forms. That compound which exists in more  than one crystalline forms is tailed a 
polymorphic, and these forms are called polymorphs, and  these forms are called polymorphs 
of each other. 
Polymorphs have same chemical properties, but they difer in the phy sical properties. The diference 
in physical properties is due to diferent structural arrangement of  their particles. 
The following compounds are important polymorphs.
Substance crystalline forms
AgNO3
CaCO3Rhombohedral, Othorhombic
Trigonal and orthorhombic
9. Allotropy
 The existence of an element in more than one crystalli ne forms is known as allotropy 
and these forms of the element are called allotropes or  allotropic forms.  Sulphur, phosphorus, 
carbon and tin are some important examples of elements which show a llotropy.
Element Crystalline forms
Sulphur, S
Carbon, C
Tin, SnRhombic, monoclinic
cubic (diamond), hexagonal (graphite)
grey tin (cubic), white tin (tetragonal)304 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
10. Transition Temperature 
 It is that temperature at which two crystalline forms o f the same substance can co-ex -
ist in equilibrium with each other. At this temperatu re, one crystalline form of a substance 
changes to another.  
Above and below this temperature, only one form exists. A few examples for those substances 
which show allotropy and possess a transition temperature are given below
 (i)  Grey Tin (cubic)     ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀13.2oC
 White tin (Tetragonal)
 (ii)  Sulphur S8 (rhombic)    ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀95.5oC
 Sulphur S8(monoclinic)
 (iii) KNO3 (orthorhombic)    ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀ ฀128oC
 KNO3(rhombohedral)
 (iv) Na2S04-10H20 (hydrated form)  ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀฀32.38oC
 N a2S04(anhydrous from) + 10 H20
 (v)  Na2CO3- 10 H20 (higher hydrated form) ฀฀฀฀ ฀฀ ฀฀฀฀32.38oC
 Na2CO3-7H20 (lower hydrated form) + 3H20
 It has been noticed that the transition temperature of the allotropic forms  of an element is 
always less than its melting point.
4.5 CRYSTAL LATTICE
 A crystal is made up of atoms, ions or molecules. In crystall ine solids, these atoms, ions or 
molecules are located at deinite positions in space. 
These positions are represented by points in a crystal. 
These points are called as lattice points or lattice sites. 
This arrangement of points in a crystal is called crystal 
lattice or space lattice. 
So a crystal lattice is an array of points representing 
atoms, ions or molecules of a crystal, arranged at 
diferent sites in three dimensional space.  Fig. (4.13) 
shows a crystal lattice with a cubic structure.
Fig (4.13) Cubic crystal lattice314 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.5.1 Unit Cell
 When we look at the cubic crystal lattice in Fig (4.14), we see that it is actually composed of 
many small parts. The smallest part of the crystal lattice has all the charac teristic features of 
the entire crystal and is called a unit cell.
It  means that a unit cell of a crystal lattice is the smallest bl ock or geometrical igure, from which the 
entire crystal can be built up by repeating it in three dimensions . It shows the structural properties 
of a given crystal. The complete information about the crystalline str ucture is present within a unit 
cell which repeats itself in three dimensions to form a crystal. 
 If we know the exact arrangement of atoms in a unit cell, we in f act know their arrangement 
in the whole crystal.
 The quantitative aspects of a crystal lattice are deduced from the si ze and shape of the unit cell. 
There are three unit cell lengths a, b, c and three unit cell  angles a , b and γ. These six parameters 
are shown in Fig (4.14)
 The angle ‘ a’ is between the lengths ‘b’ and ‘c’, the angle ‘ b’ is between the sides ‘a’ and ‘c’ and 
angle’ γ’ is between sides ‘a’ and ‘b’. The unit cell lengths a, b, c , may be assigned along x, y and z 
axis, respectivly but angles a , b and γ have to be decided accordingly. The choice of x, y, z may be 
along any of the three axis. These six parameters of the unit cell a re called unit cell dimensions or 
crystallographic elements. 
 Keeping in view the structure of the unit cell we can understand the crystal system. 
Fig (4.14) Six crystallographic elements specify the size and
shape of a unit cell324 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.6 CRYSTALS AND THEIR CLASSIFICATION
A crystal system may be identiied by the dimensions of its unit c ell along its three edges or axes, a, 
b, c and three angles between the axes a , b , γ. 
 There are seven crystal systems. These seven crystal 
systems are described as follows Fig (4.15).
1. Cubic system 
 In this system all the three axes are of equal length and 
all are at right angles to one another. 
Animation 4.8: Unit Cell
Source & Credit: Commons
Animation 4.9: Classiication of Crystals
Source & Credit: wikipedia334 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
2. Tetragonal system
 In this system two axes are of equal length and the 
third axis is either shorter or larger than the other two. All 
angles are 90°.
3. Orthorhombic Or Rhombic System
 All the three axes are of unequal length and all are at 
right angle to each other.
4. Monoclinic System 
 All the three axes are of unequal length; two of these 
axes are at right angle to each other while the third angle 
is greater then 90°.
5. Hexagonal System 
 In this system two axes are of equal length and are 
in one plane making an angle of 120o with each other. The 
third axis which is diferent in length than the other two is 
at right angle to these two axes.
6. Rhombohedral System Or Trigonal System 
 All the three axes are of an equal length like cubic 
system but the three angles are not equal and lie between 
900 and 120°.
7. Triclinic System 
 All the three axes and the three angles are unequal and none of the a ngles is 900.
 Table (4.7) shows the unit cell dimensions of the seven crystal s ystems alongwith their 
examples
Fig (4.15) Seven crystal systems344 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Sr. 
NoCrystal system Axes Angles Examples
1. cubic= =abcabγ= = = 90o Fe, Cu, Ag, Au, NaCl, NaBr, Dimond
2. Tetragonal= ≠abcabγ= = = 90o
 Sn, SnO2, MnO2, NH4Br
3. Orthorhombic≠≠abcabγ= = = 90o Idoine, Rhombic, Sulphur, BaSO4, K2SO4
4. Monoclinic≠≠abc  aγ b= = ≠ 90 , 90oo Sugar, Sulphur, Borax, NaSO.10H2O
5. Hexagonal= ≠abc o0á=â=90  , ã=120Graphite, ZnO, CdS, Ice, Zn, Cd
6. Rhombohedral
or Trignol= =abcabγ==>< 90 and 120oo Bi, Al2O3, NaNO3, KNO3
7. Triclinic≠≠abcabγ≠ ≠≠ 90o H3BO3, K2Cr2O7, CuSO4.5H2O
4.7 CLASSIFICATION OF SOLIDS
 In the preceding section, we noted that the crystals are classiied i nto seven systems depending 
upon the dimensions of the unit cells. A unit cell contains a dein ite number of atoms, ions, or 
molecules. These atoms, ions or molecules are held together by diferent ty pes of cohesive forces. 
These forces may be chemical bonds or some type of interactions. Ther e are four types of crystalline 
solids depending upon the type of bonds present in them. 
(i)  Ionic solids     
(ii)  Covalent solids 
(iii)  Metallic solids    
(iv)  Molecular solids
4.7.1 Ionic Solids
 Crystalline solids in which the particles forming the crystal are positively and negatively 
charged ions are called ionic solids. These ions are held together by strong electrostatic forces of 
attraction. These attractive forces are also called ionic bonds. The c rystals of NaCl, KBr, etc are ionic 
solids.Table (4.7) Seven Crystal Systems354 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Properties of Ionic Solids
 The cations and anions are arranged in a well deined geometrical  pattern, so they are 
crystalline solids at room temperature. Under ordinary conditions of temperature and pressure 
they never exist in the form of liquids or gases. 
 Ionic crystals are very stable compounds. Very high energy is required to separate the cations 
and anions from each other against the forces of attraction. That is  why ionic crystals are very hard, 
have low volatility and high melting and boiling points.
  Ionic solids do not exist as individual neutral independent molec ules. Their cations and anions 
attract each other and these forces are non-directional. The close pack ing of the ions enables 
them to occupy minimum space. A crystal lattice is developed when th e ions arrange themselves 
systematically in an alternate manner.
 The structure of the ionic crystals depends upon the radius ratio of cations and anions. For 
example.NaCl and CsF have the same geometry because the radius rati o in both the cases is the 
same.
 In the case of ionic crystals we always talk about the formula mass of these substances and 
not the molecular mass, because they do not exist in the form of molecul es.
Fig (4.16) Explanation of brittleness of  ionic crystals364 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 
Ionic  crystals do not conduct electricity in the solid state, becaus e on account of electrostatic force 
existing between them the cations and anions remain tightly held together  and hence occupy ixed 
positions. Ionic crystals conduct electricity when they are in solu tion or in the molten state. In both 
cases ions become free. 
 Ionic crystals are highly brittle because ionic solids are com posed of parallel layers which 
contain cations and anions in alternate positions, so that the opposite ions in the various parallel 
layers lie over each other. 
When an external force is applied, one layer of the ions slides a bit over the other layer along a plane. 
In this way the like ions come in front of each other and hence begi n to  repel. So, the application 
of a little external force develops repulsion between two layers causing brittleness Fig (4.16).
 Ionic solids are mostly of high density due to close packing of ions. Such compounds having 
the ionic crystals give ionic reactions in polar solvents and these a re very fast reactions. 
 The  properties like isomorphism and polymorphism are also ass ociated with the ionic crystals. 
In order to understand the structure of ionic crystals, let us expla in the structure of sodium chloride 
crystals.
Animation 4.10: Ionic Solids
Source & Credit: Grandinetti374 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Structure of Sodium Chloride 
 The structure of ionic crystals depends upon the structure and the size of their ions. Each ion is 
surrounded by a certain number of ions of opposite charge. In the structure of NaCl each Na+ ion is 
surrounded by six chloride ions. Fig (4.17) shows how these i ons are arranged in the crystal lattice. It is 
clear that Na+ has ten electrons while Cl- has total 18 electrons. The size of the Cl- is bigger than that of Na+
 The  distance between two nearest ions of the same kind i.e., Cl- ions is 5.63 o
A . So the 
distance between two adjacent ions of diferent kind is 5.63/2 = 2. 815 o
A.
Animation 4.11: classiication of solids
Source & Credit: Askiitians384 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 
 
 
 
  The location of Na+ and Cl- is such that each Na+ is surrounded by six Cl- placed at the corners 
of a regular octahedron Fig. (4.17 a). So the coordination number  of each Na+ is six. Similarly, 
each Cl- is also surrounded by six Na+. Na+ and C1- are not connected to one another by pairs 
because all six Cl- ions are at the same distance away from one Na+. It has been observed that 
independent molecules of NaCl  do exist in the vapour phase. Anyhow,  in solid NaCl there 
are no independent molecules of NaCl. That is why NaCl is said  to have formula unit of NaCl.
 While  looking at the Fig.(4.17 b), we see that there are eight Cl- at the comers of the cube, and 
each is being shared amongst eight cubes. l/8th part of each Cl- ion is considered for this unit cell. 
So, one complete Cl- is contributed by eight corners. Similarly,six chloride ions are present at the 
face centres and each is being shared between t wo cells. Thus.per  unit cell there are 8/8 + 6/2 = 
4 Cl- ions. You can justify the presence of 4 Na+ , if you take a unit cell having 8Na+ at eight corners 
and 6Na+ at faces. So, there are equal number of Na+ ions, and therefore 4 NaCl units are present 
per unit cell. Fig (4.17b)
Lattice Energy
 Solids are composed of atoms, ions or molecules. However, many solid s of daily importance 
are ionic in nature. As mentioned earlier these ions exist in a three dimensional array which is 
called as lattice.
Figs (4.17 a, b) The unit cell of sodium chloride showin g that four NaCl formula units are present in a unit c ell.394 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 When the oppositely charged ions are brought, close to each other energy  is released. So 
the lattice energy is the energy released when one mo le of the ionic crystal is formed from 
the gaseous ions. It is also deined as the energy requ ired to break one mole of solid into 
isolated ions in the gas phase. It is expressed in kj mole-1.
    +−+→(g) Cl (g) ( )Na NaCl s   −= − ฀1H 787kJmole
 Table (4.8) shows the lattice energies of many ionic compounds. It is clear from the table that 
lattice energy decreases with the increase in the size of the cation keepi ng the anion same. It also 
decreases with the increase in the size of anion. The reason in both cases is the same. With the 
increase in the size of either cation or anion, the packing of opposi tely charged ions becomes less 
and less tight. The calculations related to the measurement of lattice en ergy will be discussed in 
chapter seven.
4.7.2. Covalent Solids
 Covalent solids are also called atomic solids, because they are com posed of neutral atoms of 
the same or of diferent elements. These atoms are held together by covalent bon ds.
 Covalent solids are of two types.
(i)  When the covalent bonds join to form giant molecules like diamon d, silicon carbide or aluminium nitride. 
(ii)  When atoms join to form the covalent bonds and separate layers are produced like that of 
graphite, cadmium iodide and boron nitride.Ionic
compoundLattice energy
(kJ/mol-1)
LiCl -833
NaF -895
NaCl -787
KCl -690
NaBr -728
KBr -665
Nal -690Tables (4.8) Lattice energies 
of ionic compounds404 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Properties of Covalent Crystals
 The bonding in covalent crystals extend in three dimensions. They contain a network of atoms. 
The valencies of atoms are directed in deinite directions, so the packi ng of atoms in these crystals 
is looser than those of ionic and metallic crystals. Thus covalent crystals have open structure. 
 These crystals are very hard and considerable amount of energy i s required to break them. 
They have high melting points and their volatility is very low.
 Due  to the absence of free electrons and ions they are bad conductors of  electricity. 
However, graphite has a layered structure and the electrons are availa ble in between the layers. 
These electrons are delocalised and conductivity becomes possible. Grap hite is not a conductor 
perpendicular to the layers.
 Mostly covalent crystalline solids are insoluble in polar solvents like water but they are readily 
soluble in non-polar solvents like benzene and carbon tetrachloride. The covalent crystals having 
giant molecules like diamond and silicon carbide are insolubl e in all the solvents. Because of their 
big size, they do not interact with the solvent molecules. The chemical reactions of such crystalline 
solids are very slow.
 Let us try to understand the structure of diamond, which is a wel l known covalent solid.
Structure of Diamond
 Diamond is one of the allotropic modiications of 
carbon. It is best understood by taking into consideration 
the number of electrons in the outermost shell of carbon, 
which are four. The four atomic orbitals (one 2s and three 
2p) undergo sp3 hybridization to give four sp3 hybridized 
orbitals. They are directed in space along the four corners 
of a tetrahedron Fig. (4.18 a).
 This is the unit cell of diamond and a large number of 
such unit cells undergo sp3-sp3 overlapping to form a huge 
structure. Each carbon atom is linked with four other carbon 
atoms. The bonds between carbon atoms are covalent 
which run through the crystal in three-dimensions. All the 
bond angles are 109.5° and the bond lengths are 154 pm.414 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
The whole lattice is, therefore, continuous and because of the continui ty of C-C covalent bonding, 
the entire diamond crystal behaves as a huge or giant three-dimension al carbon molecule. This is 
also called a macro-molecule.
Fig.(4.18b), The overall structure of diamond looks face centred-c ubic Fig. (4.18 c)
4.7.3. Molecular Solids 
 Those solid substances in which the particles forming the crys tals are polar or non-polar 
molecules or atoms, of a substance are called molecular solids. F or instance, in solidiied noble 
gases, there are non-polar atoms. Two types of of diamond intermolecul ar forces hold them 
together.
 (i)  Dipole-dipole interactions.
 (ii)  van der Waals forces.
 These  intermolecular forces are much weaker than the forces of attra ction between the 
cations and the anions in ionic crystals, and between the atoms in  the covalent crystals. 
 Ice and sugar are the best examples of crystals having polar m olecules whereas iodine, sulphur, 
phosphorus and carbon dioxide form the molecular crystals contai ning nonpolar molecules. Polar 
molecular solids have usually higher melting and boiling poin ts as compared to non-polar molecular 
solids.Fig(4.18 c) face-centered cubic structure  
of diamond424 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Properties of the Molecular Solids
 X-ray analysis has shown the regular arrangements of atoms i n constituent molecules of 
these solids, and we get the exact positions of all the atoms.
  The forces, which hold the molecules together in molecular crystal s, are very weak so they 
are soft and easily compressible. 
 They  are mostly volatile and have low melting and boiling points.  They are bad conductors 
of electricity, have low densities and sometimes transparent to light. P olar molecular crystals are 
mostly soluble in polar solvents, while non-polar molecular crysta ls are usually soluble in non-polar 
solvents. 
 Iodine is one of the best examples of a molecular solid. Let us dis cuss the structure of iodine 
molecule.
Structure of Solid Iodine
 In the solid state the molecules of iodihe align in the form of layer  lattice. This is shown in Fig 
(4.19). I -I bond distance is 271.5 pm and it is appreci ably longer than in gaseous iodine (266.6 pm). 
As expected from its structure, iodine is a poor conductor of electrici ty.
Fig (4.19) Face centered cubic structure of iodine434 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.7.4. Metallic Solids
 In order to explain properties of 
metallic solids various theories have been 
proposed. A few of them are mentioned 
here.
 The irst theory of metallic bonding is 
called electron pool or electron gas theory. 
This theory was proposed by Drude and 
extended by Loren (1923). According to 
this theory, each atom in a metal crystal 
loses all of its valence electrons. These 
valence electrons form a pool or a gas. 
The positively charged metal ions are 
believed to be held together by electron 
pool or gas. These positively charged ions 
occupy deinite positions at measurable 
distances from each other in the crystal 
lattice. Valence elect rons are not attached to any individual ion or a  pair of ions rather belong to 
t he crystal as a whole. These electrons are free to move about from one pa rt of the crystal to the 
other. The force, which binds a metal cation to a number of electrons  within its sphere of- inluence, 
is known as metallic bond. The following Fig. (4.20) gives a n idea of electron gas model.
 L. Pauling has tried to explain the metallic bond according to valence bond theory. According to 
this theory, the metallic bond is treated essentially as covalent in ch aracter. However, it is assumed 
that the covalent bonds are not localized but are highly delocalized i n metal structure.
 Recently, molecular orbital theory was applied to explain the char acteristics of metallic  
solids. According to this theory, it is assumed that the electrons in  the completely illed orbitals 
are essentially localized, while atomic orbitals containing the val ence electrons interact or overlap 
to form a set of delocalized orbitals. These delocalized orbitals are the molecular orbitals which 
extend over the entire crystal lattice. Such a combination of atomic orbi tals produce as a large 
number of closely spaced states. These states of energy are also known  as bands of energy. That is 
why it is also called a band theory. The energy gap between two ba nds determines the properties 
of the metallic solids.
Fig (4.20) Positive ions surrounded by mobile electrons444 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Properties of Metallic crystals
 Metals are good conductor of electricity. When electric ield is appl ied between two ends of 
a metal then the mobile electrons begin to  move towards the positive pole and the new electrons 
from the negative pole take their place Fig. (4.21a) Sometimes, the electr ical conductivity of metals 
decrease with the increase in temperature. The reason is that with the i ncrease in temperature the 
positive metal ions also begin to oscillate and the motion hinders the fr ee movement of mobile 
electrons between the positive ions. This hindrance decreases the electrica l conductivity.
 The rmal conductivity is another property associated with metallic solids. When a piece of 
metal is heated at one end, the mobile electrons at this end absorb heat en ergy and move very 
rapidly through the metallic lattice towards the cooler end. During th e process they collide with 
adjacent electrons and transfer their heat energy to them.
 Whenever  the metals are freshly cut, most of them possess metallic lu ster which means that 
they have a shining surface. When light falls on the metallic s urface, the incident light collides with 
the mobile electrons and they are excited. These electrons when deexcited gi ve of some energy 
in the form of light. This light appears to be relected from the sur face of the metal which gives a 
shining look.
Fig (4.21a) Explanation of electrical conductivity of a metal454 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 Metals are malleable and ductile whenever stress is applied on them . Their layers slip pass 
each other. The structure of the metal changes without fracturing as shown in the Fig. (4.21b).
Structure of Metals
 In the  previous article of metallic solids, we have 
learnt that metal atoms are arranged in deinite pattern. 
Free electrons are roaming about in the crystal lattice. So 
a metal may be regarded as an assembly of the positively 
charged spheres of identical radii which are packed 
together to ill the space as completely as possible.
  To understand the closed packing of atoms in metal 
structures, let us suppose that the metal atoms are like 
hard spherical balls. Take twelve spherical balls and pack  
in a box as shown in Fig (4.22 a). 
Fig(4.21b) Deformation of metal structures
Fig (4.22 a) Packing of twelve sphere in a box 
(two dimensional view)464 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
The spaces during the packing are larger. When the box 
is shaken, the balls will rearrange as shown in Fig (4.22  b). 
The arrangement of these balls are now stable and more 
closely packed. It is the natural tendency of the balls to 
have closely packed arrangement of eleven spheres after 
shaking.
 In order to understand,how various unit cells of the 
crystal lattice are developed, consider three balls which 
join together in one plane. The fourth ball is inserted in 
the space created by the other three as a second layer. 
In this way tetrahedral structure is obtained Fig (4.22 c). 
Actually, the fourth ball of the second layer is placed in 
the depression created by the irst three balls. These depressions are a lso called interstices or 
crevices or voids.
 Consider  the Fig (4.22 d) in which eleven balls of Fig. (4 .22 b) are present in the irst layer 
(circles with shade). The balls of the second layer (circle wi thout shade) can it into the depressions 
or interstices created by the irst layer. When the balls of the second layer are arranged, then all 
the depressions of the irst layer are not occupied. There are two types of  depressions as ‘a’ and 
‘b’. The depressions marked ‘b’ are not occupied by the second la yer and one can see the ground 
from looking at the top through depressions ‘b’. The new depressions marked ‘a’ are created by the 
second layer. Through the depressions ‘a’, we can not see the ground , but balls of the irst layer.
Now arrange the balls of third layer in the depression of second l ayer. When the balls of the third 
layer are placed abov the second layer then there are two possibilities.  Third layer balls may be 
accommodated in ‘a’- type or ‘b’-type interstices or depressions.
Fig (4.22 b)Packing of eleven spheres in a box 
( two dimentional view)
Fig (4.22 c) The formation of a
tetrahedral site, due to four balls
Fig (4.22 d) Close packing of spheres, showing 11 
balls in irst layer and 6 balls in second layer.474 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
(i) Cubic Close Packing
 When the atoms of the third layer it into the interstices marked b, then  the atoms of the 
third layer will not lie directly above those of the atoms of irst layer . This pattern of arrangement 
is called ABC ABC-------------- or 123 123----------- ------. It is named as face centred cubic arrangement 
Fig. (4.23a). The balls of fourth, seventh and tenth layers wil l be in front of each other.
(ii) Hexagonal Close Packing
 When the atoms of the third layer are arranged in such a way tha t they occupy the depressions 
created by the second layer i.e., in the ‘a’ types crevices then these a toms will directly lie above the 
atoms of irst layer. This pattern of arrangement is usually wri tten as ABAB ....... or 1212  . This 
pattern has been named as hexagonal close packing Fig(4.23b).  The balls of third, ifth, seventh 
layers will be in front of each other.
Comparison of Properties of Various Types of Crystals
The following table gives a view to the comparison of properties of four types of crystals.
Fig (4.23 a) Cubic close packing or
Face centred cubic arrangement (ABCABC . . . )Fig (4.23 b) Hexagonal close packing (ABAB . . . )484 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 Type of 
Solid Structural
Particles Intermolecular
Forces Typical Properties Examples
 Metallic cations plus
delicalized
electronsmetallic
bonshardness varies from soft to
Very hard; melting points
varied from low to very high;
lustrous; ductile; malleable;
very good conductors of heat
and electricityNa; Mg; Al
Fe; Zn; Cu;
Ag; W
Ionic cations and 
anionselectrostatic
attractionshard; moderate to very high
melting points: 
nonconductors
of electricity  (but good 
electrical
conductors in the molten 
state)NaCl;NaNO3,
MgO
Molecular molecules
(atoms of
noble gases)Landon and/or
dipole-dipole
and/or
hydrogen bondssoft; low melting points:
nonconductors of heat and
electricity; sublime easily
in many casesnoble-gas
elements;
CH4; CO2; P4
S8; I2; H2O
Network
covalentatoms  covalent bonds very hard; very high melting
points: nonconductors of
elecrioityC(diamonds);
SiC; SiO2Table (4.9) Type of Crystalline Solids494 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
4.8 Determination of Avogadro’s Number  (NA)
 Avagadro number can be calculated in a number of diferent way s. One of the most accurate 
methods for determining this number is based on the study of crysta lline solids.
 In order to calculate this number, we need to know the volume of one gra m-mole of a crystalline solid 
and the distance between its atoms or ions in the crystal lattice.
 The  volume of one gram-mole of a solid can be calculated from its  density while the spacing 
between its atoms can be measured by X-rays.
The method of determining Avogadro’ s number is explained with a h elp of following solved exam-
ple which gives a reasonably good value of this number. The crys tal of LiF is primitive cubic and can 
be used to calculate the Avogadro’s number.
Example:
 The density of LiF is 2.65 g cm-3. It is made up of cubic array of alternate Li+ and F- ions and the 
distance between these ions is 2.01 o
A(2.01 x 10-8 cm). Calculate the Avogadro’s number.
Solution:
 The formula mass of LiF  =  6.939 + 18.9984
       =  25.9374 g mol-1
 Density of LiF    =  2.65 g cm-3
 
 From the density and molar mass, calculate the volume of 1 mole of solid LiF
 
       The volume occupied
     by one formula unit of LiF  =  −
−1
325.9374g mol
2.65g cm
       =  9 .788 cm3 mol-1504 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
From  this volume, we can calculate the edge length of the cube. For th is, we suppose that 9.788cm3 
of LiF i.e., 1 mole of LiF, is present in the form of a cube. Th e cube root of this volume will give the 
length of one edge of cube.
 Edge length of the cube  =  3 39.788cm
       =  2 .139 cm
The number  of ions of both Li+ and F- on one edge length can be calculated by dividing the edge 
length by distance between ions. Hence, the number of (Li+and F- ) ions along one edge length
       =   −−×812.139cm
2.01 10 cm ion
       =  1 .064x108
When we take the cubes of these ions we get the total number of ions i.e. L i+ and F- in the cube.
Total number (Li+F-) of ions in the cube   =  (1.064x108)3
        =  1 .204x1024
 Since the cube of LiF crystal contains  one Avogadro’s number of Li+ and one Avogadro’s 
number of F- , so the Avogadro’s number will be
     81.20410
2x
   =6.02x1023514 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1. Among  three states of matter i.e. gases, liquids and solids, the intermolecular attractive forces 
in the gases are negligible. In liquids intermolecular forces a re strong enough to keep the 
molecules close together. Anyhow, the molecules in liquids are free to m ove with respect to 
one another. In solids the particles occupy speciic locations in th ree dimensional arrangement. 
Molecules in liquids are free to move with respect to one another. In soli ds the particles occupy 
speciic locations in three dimensional arrangement.
2. There  are four types of intermolecular forces i.e. dipole-dipole forces, London dispersion forces, 
hydrogen bonding and Ion-dipole forces. The relative strengths of di pole-dipole and dispersion 
forces depend upon the polarity, polarisability, size and shape of the molecules. Hydrogen 
bonding occurs in compounds containing 0-H,N - H, H - F b onds.
3. The  vapour pressure of a liquid measures the tendency of a li quid to evaporate. It is the pressure 
exerted by the vapours on the surface of a liquid when the rate of evapor ation is equal to the 
rate of condensation. A liquid boils when its vapour pressure equa ls the external pressure.
4. Many crystalline solids melt to give a turbid liquid before m elting to give a clear liquid. These 
turbid liquids possess some degree of order and are called liqui d crystals. Liquid crystals have 
the luidity of liquids and the optical properties of solids.
5. In  crystalline solids the particles are arranged in a reg ular and repeating manner. The essential 
structural features of a crystalline solid can be represented by i ts unit cell. The three dimensional 
array of points representing atoms, ions or molecules is called cr ystal lattice. The points in the 
crystal lattice represent positions in the structure where they have identi cal environments.
6. The simplest unit cell is a cubic unit cell. There are seven crystal systems overall.
7. The properties of solids depend on the arrangement of particles an d the attractive forces 
between them. Ionic solids are hard and brittle and have high melti ng points. Covalent solids 
consist of atoms held together by covalent bonds and these bonds extend thr oughout the solid. 
They are hard and have high melting points. Metallic solids con sist of metal cations immersed 
in a sea of electrons and give a wide range of properties. Molecular  solids consist of atoms or 
molecules held together by intermolecular forces.
8. The properties of solids depend on the arrangement of particles an d the attractive forces 
between them. Ionic solids are hard and brittle and have high melti ng points. Covalent solids 
consist of atoms held together by covalent bonds and these bonds extend thr oughout the solid. 
They are hard and have high melting points. Metallic solids con sist of metal cations immersed 
in a sea of electrons and give a wide range of properties. Molecular  solids consist of atoms or 
molecules held together by intermolecular forces.524 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
(QUESTIONS OF LIQUIDS)
Q1.  Choose the best answers from the given choices.
 (i)  London dispersion forces are the only forces present among the
(a) molecules of water in liquid state
(b) atoms of helium in gaseous state at high temperature 
(c) molecules of solid iodine. 
(d) molecules of hydrogen chloride gas.
 (ii)  Acetone and chloroform are soluble in each other due to
(a)  intermolecular hydrogen bonding  (b)  ion-dipole interaction  
(c)  instantaneous dipole      (d)  all of the above
 (iii)  NH, shows a maximum boiling point among the hydrid es of Vth group elements due to 
(a)  very small size of nitrogen   (b)  lone pair of electrons pr esent on nitrogen.
(c)  enhanced electronegative character of nitrogen
(d)  pyramidal structure of NH3
(iv)  When water freezes at 0"C, its density decreases due to 
(a)  cubic structure of ice    (b)  empty spaces present in the structure of ice 
(c)  change of bond lengths   (d)  change of bond angles 
(v)  In order to raise the boiling point of water upto 110°C, the extern al pressure should be 
(a)  between 760 torr and 1200 torr  (b)  between 200 torr and 7 60 torr 
(c)  765 torr      (d)  any value of pressure
Q2.  Fill in the blanks with suitable words 
(i)  The polarizability of noble gases________down the group a nd results in the increase in 
their  boiling points. 
(ii)  ________ is developed in acetone and chloroform when they a re mixed together. 
(iii)  Exceptionally weak_____of HF is due to strong hydrogen b onding present in it. 
(iv)  The concept of dynamic equilibrium is the ultimate ______ _of all reversible systems. 
(v)  ∆Hv of C6H14 should be_____ than that of C2H6. 
(vi)  During the formation of ice from liquid water there is a____ __ % increase in volume. 
(vii)  The rate of increase of vapour pressure of water_______at hi gh temperatures. 
(viii)  A layer of ice on the surface of water____the water under neath for further heat loss. 
(ix)  Evaporation is a ________process. 
(x)  Liquid crystals are used in the display of_________ devices.534 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Q3.  Indicate true or false as the case may be 
(i)  Dipole-dipole forces are weaker than dipole-induced dipole forc es.
(ii)  The ion dipole interactions are responsible for the dissolution  of an ionic substance in water. 
(iii) The high polarizability of iodine is responsible for its  existence in solid form and its diference  
 from other halogens. 
(iv)  The strong hydrogen bonding in H2S makes it diferent from water. 
(v)  Hydrocarbons are soluble in water because they are polar comp ounds. 
(vi)  The viscosities of liquids partially depend upon the extent of hydrogen bonding. 
(vii)  The state of equilibrium between liquid state and vapours is  dynamic in nature. 
(viii)  Heat of vapourization of liquids depend upon the intermolecu lar forces of attraction present   
 between their molecules. 
(ix)  Ice does not show any vapour pressure on its surface at -1oC. 
(x)  Boiling point of a liquid is independent of external press ure.
Q4 (a) What type of intermolecular forces will dominate in the foll owing liquids.
  (i)  Ammonia, NH3    (ii)  Octane, C8 H18   (iii)  Argon, Ar 
 (iv)  Propanone, CH3COCH3  (v)  Methanol, CH3OH 
 (b)  Propanone (CH3COCH3), propanol (CH3CH2CH2OH) and butane (CH3CH2CH2CH3) have 
very similar relative molecular masses. List them in the expected order  of increasing boiling points. 
Explain your answer.
Q.5  Explain the following with reasons.
(i)  In the hydrogen bonded structure of HF, which is the stronger  bond: the shorter covalent   
          bond or the longer hydrogen bond between diferent molecules.  
(ii)  In a very cold winter the ish in garden ponds owe their li ves to hydrogen bonding? 
(iii)  Water and ethanol can mix easily and in all proportion s. 
(iv)  The origin of the intermolecular forces in water. 
Q6 (a) Briely consider some of the efects on our lives if water has only a very weak hydrogen  
                bonding present among its molecules.
 (b) All gases have a characteristic critical temperature. Above th e critical temperature it is   
             impossible to liquefy a gas. The critical temper atures of carbon dioxide and methane are  
                    31.14 0C and -81.9 0C, respectively. Which gas has the stronger intermolecular forces? Briely    
              explain your choice?544 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Q7  Three liquids have the properties mentioned against their names
Water Propanone Pentane
(i) Molecular Formula H2O C3H6O C5H12
(ii) Relative molecular mass (a.m.u.) 18 58 72
(iii)Enthalpy change of
vapourization (kJ mol-1)41.1 31.9 27.7
(iv) Boiling point (0C) 100 56 36
 (a)  What type of intermolecular force predominates in each liqui d?
 (i)  water  (ii)  propanone   (iii)  pentane
 (b)  What do you deduce about the relative strength of these forces in th e liquids?
             Justify your conclusions.
 (c)  If the liquids are shaken together in pairs,
  (i)  Which pair would be unlikely to mix?
  (ii)  Explain this immiscibility in terms of the forces betw een the molecules.
  (iii)     Choose one of the pairs that mix and say whether the en thalpy change on mixing   
                               would be positive or negative.
Q8  Describe the various forces responsible for keeping the particles together in the following  
         elements  and compounds and their efects on physical p roperties making use of the data  
          below.
Substance Formula Molar Mass (a.m.u.) M.P(°C)
Neon Ne 20 -248
Argon Ar 40 -189
Water H2O 18 0
Sodium luoride NaF 42 993
Diamond C 12 3350
Q9  The boiiing points and molar masses of hydrides of some ir st row elements are tabulated  
          below:
Substance Boiling Point (K) Molar Mass (g mol-1)
CH4109 16
NH3240 17
H2O 373 18554 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
 Suggest reasons for the diference in their boiling points in terms of the type of molecules 
involved and the nature of the forces present between them.
Q10 Explain the term saturated vapour pressure. Arrange in order of increasing vapour pressure:  
         ldm3 water, 1 dm3 ethanol, 50 cm3 water, 50 cm3 ethanol and 50 cm3 of ether.
Q11  While a volatile liquid standing in a breaker evaporates, th e temperature of the liquid remains  
           the same as that of its surrounding. If the same li quid is allowed to vapourize into atmosphere  
           in an insulated vessel, its temperature falls below th at of its surrounding. Explain the diference  
         in behaviour.
Q12  How does hydrogen bonding explain the following indicated p roperties of the substances?
 (i)  Structure of DNA     (ii)  Hydrogen bonding in proteins
 (iii) Formation of ice and its lesser density than liquid water
 (iv)  Solubilities of compounds
Q13  What are liquid crystals? Give their uses in daily life.
Q14  Explain the following with reasons.
(i)  Evaporation causes cooling.
(ii)  Evaporation takes place at all temperatures.
(iii)  Boiling needs a constant supply of heat.
(iv)  Earthenware vessels keep water cool.
(v)  One feels sense of cooling under the fan after bath.
(vi)  Dynamic equilibrium is established during evaporation of a liquid in a closed vessel at 
constant temperature.
(vii)  The boiling point of water is diferent at Murree hills an d at Mount Everest.
(viii)  Vacuum distillation can be used to avoid decomposition of a sensitive liquid.
(ix)  Heat of sublimation of a substance is greater than its hea t of vaporization.
(x)  Heat of sublimation of iodine is very high.564 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
(QUESTIONS OF SOLIDS)
Q1.  Multiple choice questions.
(i)  Ionic solids are characterized by
 (a)  low melting points.    (b)  good conductivity in solid sta te,
 (c)  high vapour pressures.   (d)  solubility in polar sol vents.
(ii) Amorphous solids
 (a)  have sharp melting points.
 (b)  undergo clean cleavage when cut with knife.
 (c)  have perfect arrangement of atoms.
 (d)  can possesses small regions of orderly arrangement of atoms .
(iii)  The molecules of CO2 in dry ice form the
 (a)  ionic crystals    (b)  covalent crystals
 (c)  molecular crystals   (d)  any type of crystal
(iv)  Which of the following is a pseudo solid?
 (a)   CaF2   (b)   Glass   (c)  NaCl   (d)  All
(v)  Diamond is a bad conductor because
 (a)  it has a tight structure   (b)  it has a high density
 (c)  there are no free electron present in the crystal of diamond to con duct electricity
 (d)  is transparent to light
Q2. Fill in the blanks
(i) In a crystal lattice, the number of nearest neighbours to each atom is called the_______.
(ii)  There are__________ Bravis lattices.
(iii)  A pseudo solid is regarded as__________liquid.
(iv)  Glass may begin to crystallize by a process called_____ _____ .
(v)  Crystalline solids which exhibit the same _________ in all directions are called_________.
(vi)  The branch of science which deals with the ___________ _______ of crystals is called 
crystallography.
Q.3  Indicate True/False as the case mav be
(i)  There are ive parameters in unit cell dimensions of a crysta l.
(ii)  Ionic crystals are very hard,  have low volatility and very  low melting and boiling points.574 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
(iii)  The value of lattice energy of the ionic substances depends upon the size of ions.
(iv)  Molecular orbital theory of solids is also called band theor y.
(v)  Ionic solid is good conductor of electricity in the molten state.
Q.4  What are solids? Give general properties of solids. How do you diferentiate between crystalline  
          solids and amorphous solids?
Q5
 (a) Explain the following properties of crystalline solids. Give three examples in each case.
 (i)  Anisotropy     (v) Polymorphism
 (ii) Cleavage     (vi)  Transition temperature
 (iii)  Habit of a crystal   (vii) Symmetry
 (iv)  Isomorphism    (viii) Growing of a crystal
 (b) How polymorphism and allotropy are related to each other? Give exa mples.
Q6 
 (a) Deine unit cell. What are unit cell dimensions? How the idea of crystal lattice is developed  
                from the concept of unit cell?
 (b) Explain seven crystal systems and draw the shapes of their  unit cells.
Q7 
 (a) What are ionic solids? Give their properties. Explain the stru cture of NaCl. Sketch a model to  
             justify that unit cell of NaCl has four formul a units in it.
      (b) What are covalent solids? Give their properties. Explain the structure of diamond.
       (c) What are molecular crystals? Give their properties. Ju stify that molecular crystals are softer   
               than ionic crystals.
Q8
 (a)Give diferent theories of a metallic bond. How does electron sea theory justify the electrical  
              conductivity, thermal conductivity and shining surfaces of metals?
    (b) Explain with the help of a diagram
       (i)  Cubic close packing in the structure of metals.
      (ii)  Hexagonal close packing in the structure of metals.
Q9  Crystals of salts fracture easily but metals are deformed un der stress without fracturing.  
          Explain the diference.584 LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS eLearn.Punjab
Q10  What is the coordination number of an ion? What is the coordi nation number of the cation in   
          (a) NaCl structure and (b) CsCl structure? Expl ain the reason for this diference?
Q11  Give examples of ionic solids, molecular solids and covalent macromolecular solids. What are  
           the factors which determine whether each of these types of solid will dissolve in water or not?
Q12  Explain the following with reasons:
(i)  Sodium is softer than copper, but both are very good electrical  conductors.
(ii)  Diamond is hard and an electrical insulator.
(iii)  Sodium chloride and caesium chloride have diferent stru ctures.
(iv)  Iodine dissolves readily in teterachloromethane.
(v)  The vapour pressures of solids are far less than those of li quids.
(vi)  Amorphous solid like glass is also called super cooled liquid.
(vii)  Cleavage of the crystals is itself anisotropic behaviour.
(viii)  The crystals showing isomorphism mostly have the same atom ic ratios.
(ix)  The transition temperature is shown by elements having allotrop ic forms and by   
         compounds showing polymorphism.
(x)  One of the unit cell angles of hexagonal crystal is 120°.
(xi)  The electrical conductivity of the metals decrease by increasi ng temperature.
(xii)  In the closest packing of atoms of metals, only 74% spac e is occupied.
(xiii)  Ionic crystals don’t conduct electricity in the solid sta te.
(xiv)  Ionic crystals are highly brittle.
(xv)  The number of positive ions surrounding the negative ion in the ionic crystal lattice  
         depends upon the sizes of the two ions.