CHAPTER
7    THERMOCHEMISTRY
Animation 7.1: Thermochemistry
Source & Credit:  wikispaces27.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.0.0 INTRODUCTION
 It is matter of common observation that energy in the form of heat, is ei ther evolved or 
absorbed as a result of a chemical change. This is due mostly  to the breaking of bonds in the 
reactants and formation of new bonds in the products. Bond breakin g absorbs energy but bond 
making releases it. The overall energy change that occurs, results from the diference between 
energy supplied for the breaking of reactant bonds and that evolved in  the making of product 
bonds. The study of heat changes accompanying a chemical reaction is  known as thermochemistry.
 Substances  exist, because they possess energy. Diferent substances have diferent amounts 
of energy associated with them. Due to this reason, the total energy of th e products is never equal 
to that of reactants. Hence, in a chemical change, the energy in th e form of heat will either be 
evolved or absorbed and this is called heat of reaction.
 Generally, in all chemical changes, energy is exchanged with the surroundings. When it is given out by 
the reaction, the change is said to be exothermic when it is absorbed,  the reaction is endothermic.
 When an exothermic reaction occurs, heat is given out by the system  and the temperature of 
the system rises above the room temperature. Eventually, the temperature of th e system falls to 
room temperature again as the heat produced is lost to the surroundings .
 When  an endothermic reaction occurs, the heat required for the reacti on is taken from the 
reacting materials (system) and the temperature of the system fall s below the initial temperature. 
Eventually, the temperature of the system rises to room temperature again a s heat is absorbed 
from the surroundings.
The energy units in which heat changes, usually expressed in SI system are joule (J) and kilojoule 
(kJ).
 Some of the examples of exothermic and endothermic reactions are gi ven below.
(i)  The combustion of carbon in oxygen is a common reaction.
The reaction is exothermic and 393.7kJmol ‘ of heat is evolved durin g the reaction.
(ii)  The formation of water from hydrogen and oxygen is an exother mic reaction.1
(s) 2(g) 2 (g) C    +O       CO                     H=-393 .7kJ mol .−→∆
1
2(g) 2(g) 2 (l)1H   + O        H O           H=-285.58kJ mol .2−→∆37.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
(iii)  In the Haber’s process, the formation of ammonia is a lso an exothermic reaction.
  
(iv)  The decomposition of water into oxygen and hydrogen is an endoth ermic reaction.
  
(v)  When one mole of nitrogen combines with one mole of oxygen to yield nitrogen oxide (NO), 
180.51 kJ of heat is absorbed by the system and the reaction is en dothermic.
   
 The subject matter of thermochemistry is based on the irst law of therm odynamics.  The 
subject has an important practical utility as it gives us infor mation about the energy or heat contents 
of compounds, a knowledge of which is necessary for the study of chemical bonding and chemical 
equilibrium. The scope of thermochemistry is limited mainly , because only a few of many chemical 
reactions are such, whose heats of reaction can be accurately meas ured.1
2 (l) 2(g) 2 (g) H O H  +1/2 O               H=+285.58kJ mol .−→∆1
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)N  +3H       2NH            H=-41.6kJ mol .−∆ ฀
1
2(g) 2(g) (g)N  + O     2NO     H=+180.51kJ mol .−→∆
Animation 7.2 : Thermochemistry
Source & Credit : pamcox.wikispaces47.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.1  SPONTANEOUS AND NON-SPONTANEOUS REACTIONS
 A process which takes place on its own without any outside assis tance and moves from a non-
equilibrium state towards an equilibrium state is termed as sponta neous process or natural process. 
It is unidirectional, irreversible and a real process. Some exam ples of spontaneous processes are 
given below.
(i)  Water lows from higher level to the lower level. The  low cannot be reversed without some 
external aid.
(ii)  Neutralization of a strong acid with a strong base is a spontaneous acid-base reaction.
    
(iii)  When  a piece of zinc is added to the copper sulphate sol ution, blue colour of the solution 
disappears due to the spontaneous redox reaction.
 A  reaction will also be called a spontaneous process, if it n eeds energy to start with, but once it 
is started, then it proceeds on its own. Burning of coal and hyd rocarbon in air are examples of such 
spontaneous reactions. A piece of coal does not burn in air on its ow n rather the reaction is initiated 
by a spark and once coal starts burning, then the reaction goes  spontaneously to completion.
 Non-spontaneous process is the reverse of the spontaneous process. It does  not take place 
on its own and does not occur in nature. Reversible processes constitu te a limiting case between 
spontaneous and non-spontaneous processes. Some non-spontaneous process es, can  be made 
to take place by supplying energy to the system from external source.  Some examples of non-
spontaneous processes are given below.
(i)  Pumping of water uphill.
(ii)  Transfer of heat from cold interior part nof the refrigera tor to the hot surroundings.
(iii)  When nitrogen reacts with oxygen, nitric oxide is formed.  This reaction takes place by the 
absorbance of heat. Although, N2 and O2 are present in air, but they do not react chemically at 
ordinary conditions.The reaction takes place when the energy is provi ded by lightning.
  
                  (Non-spontaneous reaction)(aq) (aq) (aq) 2 (l)NaOH  + HCI       NaCl  + H O ฀
4(aq) (s) 4(aq) (s)CuSO  + Zn ZnSO Cu →+
2(g) 2(g) (g)N+  O      2 N O ฀57.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 Our  common experience, shows that spontaneous processes proceed wi th a decrease in 
energy. We might expect, therefore, that a chemical reaction would pr oceed spontaneously if 
the reaction system decreases in energy by transferring heat to its su rroundings. In other words, 
we might expect all exothermic reactions to be spontaneous. This is u sually true, but not always. 
There are many endothermic changes that proceed spontaneously althou gh they absorb heat. For 
example,
     
  Ammonium chloride dissolves in water and this process is al so endothermic.
     
     
Animation  7.3: SPONTANEOUS AND NON-SPONTANEOUS REA CTIONS
Source & Credit : thompsona.free.fr1
2 (l) 2 (g)H O          H O                  H=44.0kJmol−→∆
+1
4 (s) 4 (aq) (aq) NH Cl     NH  + Cl             H=15.1kJmol−∆ ฀67.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 Thus, energy change alone cannot help us to predict, whether a r eaction will occur 
spontaneously or not. To predict whether a reaction will occur sponta neously or not it is necessary 
to study the free energy of the system. The concept of free energy can hel p us to understand the 
processes in terms of entropy change. Anyhow, its discussion is outside the scope of this book.
7.2  SYSTEM, SURROUNDING AND STATE FUNCTION
 These are the terms employed in the study of thermochemistry. To u nderstand the energy 
changes in materials, let us deine these terms.
 We shall be using them frequently later on. The term system is used for anything (materials) 
under test in the laboratory, or under consideration in the classroom  for the purpose of argument. 
We can say that any portion of the universe which is under study  is called a system and the 
remaining portion of the universe is known 
as its surroundings.
 The  real or imaginary  surface separating  
the system from the surroundings is called 
the boundary, Fig. (7.1). In an experimental 
work, a speciic amount of one or more 
substances constitute a system, e.g. one mole 
of oxygen conined in a cylinder itted with a 
piston is a system. The cylinder, the piston 
and all other objects outside the cylinder are 
surroundings. Similarly, a cup of water is a 
system. The air surrounding it, the table on 
which it is lying, etc. are surroundings.
 Consider, the reaction between Zn and 
CuSO4 solution. This can be called a system 
under observation. The lask, the air, etc. are 
the surroundings, Fig (7.1).
Fig (7.1) System and surroundings77.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 The  state of a system is the condition of a system. When any proces s is performed on a 
system its state is altered in some ways. Let us consider a beaker containing water. It will be a 
system having certain temperature and volume.
 This  initial condition of the system may be called the initia l state. Suppose we heat the beaker. 
The system will undergo a change after heating. The inal conditi on of the system may now be 
called the inal state of the system. By comparing both initial and  inal states of the system, we can 
describe the.change taking place in the system.
 Let T1 and T2 denote the temperatures of water before and after heating, respectively. T he 
change in temperature T∆, may then be represented as
    T = Final temperature - Inital temperatu re ∆
    21T = T     -    T∆
 A  state function is a macroscopic property of a system which has some deinite values for 
initial and inal states, and which is independent of the path a dopted to bring about a change. By 
convention, we use capital letters as symbols for a state function, e. g. pressure (P), temperature (T), 
volume (V), internal energy (E) and enthalpy (H), are all state functions.
 Let us suppose, that V1 is the initial volume of a gas. A  change is brought about in the gas and 
its inal volume becomes V2. The change in volume ( V∆) of the gas is given by
     21V = V       -      V∆
Animation 7.4: SYSTEM, SURROUNDING AND STATE FUNC-
TION
Source & Credit : kastedu.weebly87.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 Now, this  change in volume of the gas can be brought about eith er by changing temperature 
or pressure of the gas. Since V is a state function, so V∆ will be independent of the way the volume 
of the gas has been changed. It will only depend upon the initial  and inal volumes of the gas.
7.3  INTERNAL ENERGY AND FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMIC S
 A system containing some quantity of matter has deinite amount of ener gy present in it. 
This energy is the sum of kinetic as well as the potential energi es of the particles contained in the 
system. The kinetic energy is due to the translational, rotational an d vibrational movements of 
particles, Fig (7.2). The potential energy accounts for all the types of attractive forces present in the 
system. These attractive forces, include all the types of bonds and the van der Waal’s forces present 
among the particles. 
 The total of  all the possible kinds of energies of the system is ca lled its internal energy, E. The 
change in internal energy of the system E∆ is a state function.
 It is  not possible, to measure the absolute value of internal energy of  a system, but it is often 
possible to measure the value of E∆ for a change in the state of the system.
Fig (7.2) Translational, vibrational  and rotational mo vements of molecules. Diatomic molecules have transla tional motions as well. 
Anyhow triatomic and higher molecules have translation al, vibrational and rotational motions.Translational m otion o f He
gas m olecu lesA diatomic molecule
H2 is vibratingA tetra-atomic molecule
say BF3 is rotating on an axis97.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 There are two fundamental ways of transferring energy to or from a system. These  are heat 
and work. Heat is not a property of a system. It is therefore not a sta te function. It is deined as 
the quantity of energy that lows across the boundary of a system dur ing a change in its state 
due to the diference in temperature between the system and the surroundings . Heat evolved 
or absorbed by the system is represented by a symbol q. Work is  also a form in which energy is 
transfered from one system to another. It is deined as the product of for ce and distance i.e. W = F 
x S. Work is measured in Joules in SI units. There are diferen t kinds of work. The type of work we 
most commonly encounter in thermochemistry is pressure-volume work. For example, expansion 
can occur when a gas is evolved during a chemical reaction Fi g (7.3). 
In such cases, the work W done by the system is given by
 W = -P  V ∆ (In pressure volume work, force becomes pressure and distance bec omes volume 
change where P is the external pressure and V∆ is the change in volume. Work is not a state 
function. The sign of W is positive when work is done on the system and it is negative when work is 
done by the system.
 Similarly the sign of q is positive when heat is absorbed by the system from surroundings, 
and it is negative when heat is absorbed by the surroundings fr om the system.
Fig (7.3) Pressure-volume work during expansion of a gas .107.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.3.1 First Law of Thermodynamics
 The irst law of thermodynamics, also called the law of conservation  of energy, states that 
energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but can be changed f rom one form to another. In 
other words, a system cannot destroy or create energy. However, it can exc hange energy with its 
surroundings in the form of heat and work. Thus, the energy ch ange is the sum of both heat and 
work, so that the total energy of the system and its surroundings rema ins constant.
 Consider, a gas enclosed in a cylinder having a frictionless  piston Fig (7.4). When a quantity of 
heat ‘q’ is supplied to the system, its internal energy E1 changes to E2 and piston moves upwards. 
The change in internal energy E∆ is given by the following equation.    
   
    21E = E -E  = q+w∆
    
    E = q+w∆
Animation 7.5: INTERNAL ENERGY AND FIRST LAW OF THE R-
MODYNAMICS
Source & Credit : ashamedparents117.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 In this equation ‘q’ represents the amount  of heat absorbed by th e system and V is the work 
done by the system in moving the piston up, Fig (7.4). 
 If  ‘w‘ is pressure-volume work, then the above expression assum es the following form
  E = q - P V    ............                  (2)∆∆
 When  the piston is kept in its 
original position or the volume of the gas 
is not allowed to change, then V∆ = 0 and 
equation (2) will take the following form.
  vE = q .............                    (3)∆
 This  shows that a change in internal 
energy of a system, at constant volume 
is equal to heat absorbed by the system 
(qv).
Animation 7.6: First Law of Thermodynamics
Source & Credit : docsity
Fig (7.4) Expansion of a gas and pressure-volume work.127.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.4  ENTHALPY
 Again consider the same process as described above. A quantity  of heat q is given to the 
system (gas) which is now kept at constant atmospheric pressure. 
 A part of this heat is used to increase the internal energy of the g as and the rest is used to 
do work on the surroundings. This work is done by the gas, wh en it expands against a constant 
pressure. To take account of increase in internal energy and accompanying work done by the gas, 
there is another property of the system called enthalpy or heat content. It is represented by H. In 
general, enthalpy is equal to the internal energy, E plus the produ ct of pressure and volume (PV).
     H = E + PV
 Enthalpy is a state function. It  is measured in joules. It is  not possible, to measure the enthalpy 
of a system in a given state. However, change in enthalpy ( H∆) can be measured for a change in the 
state of system . A change in enthalpy of a system can be written as:
     H = E + (PV)∆∆∆
     
 or    H = E + V P + P V∆∆ ∆ ∆
 Since, the gas is kept at constant pressure,  = 0
 Hence    H = E + P V              ..........  (4)∆∆ ∆
Animation 7.7: ENTHALPY
Source & Credit : physik.fu-berlin.de137.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 In  case of liquids and solids, the changes in state do not ca use signiicant volume change i.e. 
V∆ = 0. For such process, H∆ and E∆ are approximately the same i.e. HE∆ ≈∆
 According to irst law of thermodynamics:
     E = q + w∆
If w is pressure - volume work done by the system, then:
     w = - P V ∆
  So   E = q - P V∆∆
 
Putting the value of E∆ in equation (4) we get:
     
     H = q - P V + P V∆ ∆∆
     H = q∆
 
Since the pressure is constant, therefore,
     pH = q ......... (5)∆
 This shows that change in enthalpy is equal to heat of reaction at constant pressure. The 
reactions are carried out at constant pressure more frequently than at constant volume. So, working 
with H∆ is more convenient rather than E∆.
Example 1:
 When 2.00 moles of H2 and 1.00 mole of O2 at 100°C and 1 torr pressure react to produce 2.00 
moles of gaseous water, 484.5 kJ of energy are evolved. What are the va lues of (a) H∆ (b) E∆ for the 
production of one mole of H2O (g)?
Solution:
(a)  The reaction is occurring at constant pressure.
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)2H  + O  2H O →147.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
The enthalpy change for one mole of water vapours is
   -1
2-484.5kJH= -242.2kJ mol Answer2 molesof H O∆=
The minus sign shows that the reaction is exothermic for the producti on of 1 mole of water,
(b)  To calculate E∆ from H∆, we use the equation (4)
    H = E + P V∆∆ ∆
Let us, irst calculate the value of PV∆ using the ideal gas equation
    PV  =  nRT
  Or  
 P V  =  nRT∆∆
 Now,  n    =    No. of moles of the products -  No. of moles of the reactants ∆
            = 2moles - 3moles  =  -1mole
    -1 -1R    =   8.314JK mol
    T    =  373K
   P V    =  nRT   ...................              (6)∆∆
  
   1P V    =  -1 mole x 8.314J mol K x 373K−∆  
  
   P V    =  -3100J=-3.10kJ∆
 This  is the value for 2 moles of water. For the formation of 1 mole of water,
   -1 -3.10P V    = =-1.55kJmol2∆
On substituting, these values into equation (4).
    H = E + P V∆∆ ∆
    E = H - P V∆∆ ∆157.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
          = -242.2-(-1.55)   = -242.2+1.55
    -1E = -240.6kJ mol Answer∆
7.4.1 Enthalpy of a Reaction ( ∆Ho)
 In an exothermic reaction, the heat content or enthalpy of the products H2 is less than that of 
the reactants  H1. Since, the system has lost heat, we can say the enthalpy chan ge for the reaction 
∆H is negative, Fig (7.5 a)
 In  an endothermic reaction, the enthalpy of products H2, is greater than that of the reactants 
H1 and the enthalpy change, ∆H is positive. These enthalpy changes are represented in Fig (7. 5 b).
 The standard enthalpy of a reaction ∆Ho is the enthalpy change which occurs when the certain 
number of moles of reactants as indicated by the balanced chemi cal equation, react together 
completely to give the products under standard conditions, i.e 25 °C (298K) and one atmosphere 
pressure.  All the reactants and products must be in their standard phys ical states. Its units are kJ 
mol-1. 
 
 -285.8 kJmol-1 is standard enthalpy of reaction.
Fig (7.5) Enthalpy  changes in thermochemical reacti onso -1
2(g) 2(g) 2 ( ) 2H   +  O 2H O H  = -285.8kJmol →∆167.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.4.2  Enthalpy of Formation ( ∆H0
f)
 The standard enthalpy of formation of a compound is the amount of h eat absorbed or 
evolved when one mole of the compound is formed from its elements.  It is denoted by ∆H°f. All 
the substances involved are in their standard physical states an d the reaction is carried out under 
standard conditions i.e. at 25°C (298 K) and one atm. pressur e. Its units are kJ mol-1. For example, 
the enthalpy of formation, ( ∆H°f) for MgO(s) is - 692 kJ mol-1
   
 Similarly, when  carbon reacts with oxygen to form CO2, 393.7 kJ mol-1 of energy is released. It 
is ∆H°f, of CO2(g).
   
Animation 7.8: Enthalpy of a Reaction (DH)
Source & Credit : web.mst
o -1
(s) 2(g) (s) f1Mg  + O        MgO                       H =  -692kJ mol2→∆
o -1
(s) 2(g) 2 (g) f C +O          CO H  =-393.7kJ mol →∆177.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.4.3  Enthalpy of Atomization ( ∆Ho
at)
 The  standard enthalpy of atomization of an element is deined as th e amount of heat absorbed 
when one mole of gaseous atoms are formed from the element under standa rd conditions. It is 
denoted by Ho
at. For example, the standard enthalpy of atomization of hydrogen is given below.
   
 A  wide range of experimental techniques, are available for deter mining enthalpies of 
atomization of elements.
Animation 7.9: Enthalpy of Formation (DHf)
Source & Credit : users.humboldt
o -1
2(g) (g) at1H            H                                 H =218kJ mol2→∆187.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.4.4  Enthalpy of Neutralization ( ∆Ho
n)
 The standard enthalpy of neutralization is the amount of heat evolved when one mole of 
hydrogen ions [H+] from an acid, react with one mole of hydroxide ions from a bas e to form one 
mole of water. For example, the enthalpy of neutralization of sodiu m hydroxide by hydrochloric 
(OH-) acid is -57.4 kJ mol-1. Note that a strong acid HCl and a strong base, NaOH, ionize c ompletely 
in dilute solutions as follows.
   
   
   
Animation 7.10: Enthalpy of Atomization (DHat)
Source & Credit : github
+-
(aq) (aq) (aq)HCl   H  + Cl ฀
+-
(aq) (a q) (aq) NaOH  Na  + OH ฀197.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 When these solutions are mixed together during the process of neutra lization, the only change 
that actually occurs is the formation of water molecules leaving the sodium ions and the chloride 
ions as free ions in solution. Thus, the enthalpy of neutralization  is merely the heat of formation of 
one mole of liquid water from its ionic components,
   
 Or   
Enthalpy of  neutralization for any strong acid with a strong b ase is approximately the same i.e. 
-57.4 kJ mole-1.
7.4.5  Enthalpy of Combustion ( ∆Ho
c)
 The standard enthalpy of combustion of the substance is the amou nt of heat evolved when 
one mole of the substance is completely burnt in excess of oxygen und er standard conditions. It is 
denoted by ∆Ho
c.
Animation 7.11: Enthalpy of Neutralization (DHn)
Source & Credit : Wiki+- + - +
(aq) (aq) (aq) (aq) (aq) (aq) 2 ( )H  + Cl  + Na  + OH   Na  + Cl  + H O ฀
+ - o -1
(aq) (aq) 2 ( ) nH  + OH H O                      H =-57.4kJ mol ∆ ฀207.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
o1
2 5 2(g) 2(g) 2 ( ) cC H OH( ) + 3O        2CO  + 3H O H =-1368kJ mol−→∆  For example, standard enthalpy of combustion of ethanol ∆H0
c  is -1368kJ mol-1. The reaction 
is represented by the following equation.
   
7.4.6  Enthalpy of Solution ( ∆Ho
sol.)
 The standard enthalpy of a solution is the amount of heat absorbed or evolved when one 
mole of a substance is dissolved in so much solvent that further di lution results in no detectable 
heat change.
 For example, enthalpy of solution ( ∆Ho
sol.) of ammonium chloride is +16.2 kJmol-1 and that 
of sodium carbonate is -25.0 kJmol-1. In the irst case, heat absorbed from the surroundings is 
indicated by cooling of the solvent (water), an endothermic process. While in the second case, the 
temperature of the solvent rises showing that the process is exothermic.
Animation 7.12: Enthalpy of Combustion (DHc)
Source & Credit : wikipedia217.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
7.4.7  Measurement of Enthalpy of a Reaction
 Exothermic and endothermic reactions can easily be detected by obs erving the temperature 
of the reaction vessel before and after the reaction, as long as the hea t of reaction evolved or 
absorbed is considerable. More accurate values of ∆H can be determined by using calorimeters as 
described below.  
Animation 7.13: Enthalpy of Solution (DHsol.)
Source & Credit : commons.wikimedia227.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
(i)  Glass Calorimeter
 For most purposes, an ordinary glass calorimeter can be use d to determine the value of ∆H. 
This usual type of calorimeter, is basically an insulated  container with a thermometer and a stirrer, 
Fig (7.6). 
 Reactants in stoichiometric amounts are placed in the calorimeter . When the reaction proceeds, 
the heat energy evolved or absorbed will either warm or cool the system. The temperature of the 
system is recorded before and after the chemical reaction. Knowing  the temperature change the 
mass of reactants present and the speciic heat of water, we can cal culate the  quantity of heat q 
evolved or absorbed during the reaction. Thus:
 q = m x s x T      ................         (7) ∆
Where m = mass of reactants, s = speciic heat of the reaction mixtu re and ∆T is the change in 
temperature. The product of mass and speciic heat of water is call ed heat capacity of the whole 
system.
Fig (7.6) Glass calorimeter to measure enthalpy chang e of reactions.237.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Example 2:
 Neutralization of 100 cm3 of 0.5 M NaOH at 250C with 100 cm3 of 0.5 M HCl at 250C raised the 
temperature of the reaction mixture to 28.50C. Find the enthalpy of neutralization. Speciic heat of 
water = 4.2 J K-1g-1
Solution:
 Speciic heat of water,  s  = 4.2 JK-1g-1
 Density of H2O is around 1gcm-3, so 200 cm3 of total solution is approximately = 200g
Hence, total mass of the reaction mixture = 200g
Rise in temperature, ∆T   = 28.5-25.0 = 3.50C = 3.5 K
Animation 7.14: Measurement of Enthalpy of a Reacti on
Source & Credit : 3ddrawing.online247.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
100cm3 of 0.5 M NaOH   = 100cm3 of 0.5 MHCl
0.5 M solution means that 1000 cm3 of solution has 0.5 moles of solute
So 100 cm3 of 0.5 M solutions  =0.05 moles of HCl and NaOH, respectively
Amount of total heat evolved, (q) = m x s x ∆T
       
       = 200g x 4.2 Jg-1K-1 x 3.5 K = 2940 J
 
       =2940 J = 2.94 kJ
Since, the reaction is exothermic
 So,    q   =-2.94kJ
When  this heat is divided by number of moles, then ∆ Hn0 is for one mole
Enthalpy of neutralization. ( ∆ Hn0)
   -1 -2.94kJ  = -58.8kJ mol Answer0.05 mol=
(ii)  Bomb Calorimeter
 A bomb calorimeter is usually used for the accurate determina tion of the enthalpy of 
combustion for food, fuel and other compounds.
 A bomb calorimeter is shown in Fig (7.7). It consists of a s trong cylindrical steel vessel usually 
lined with enamel to prevent corrosion. A known mass (about one gra m) of the test substance is 
placed in a platinum crucible inside the bomb. The lid is screwed on tightly and oxygen is provided 
in through a valve until the pressure inside is about 20 atm. After  closing the screw valve, the bomb 
calorimeter is then immersed in a known mass of water in a well insulated calorimeter.257.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Then, it  is allowed to attain a steady temperature. The initial temp erature is measured, by using the 
thermometer present in the calorimeter. The test substance is then, ign ited, electrically by passing 
the current through the ignition coil. The temperature of water, which  is stirred continuously, is 
recorded at 30 sec intervals.
  From the increase of temperature ∆T, heat capacity (c) in kJK-1 of bomb calorimeter including 
bomb, water etc., we can calculate the enthalpy of combustion.
 The heat capacity ’c’ of a body or a system is deined as the qu antity of heat required to 
change its temperature by 1 kelvin.
     q = c x T ∆
Example 3:
10.16g of graphite is burnt in a bomb calorimeter and the temper ature rise recorded is 3.87K. 
Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of graphite, if the heat capac ity of the calorimeter (bomb, 
water, etc.) is 86.02 kJ K-1
Fig (7.7) Bomb calorimeter267.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Solution:
Heat capacity of bomb calorimeter       =86.02 kJK-1
Rise in temperature of the calorimeter and its contents   = 3.87 K
   
Heat gained by the system (bomb calorimeter and water etc.) q   = c x T ∆
           -1= 86.02 kJK  x 3.87K
           = 332.89 kJ
This heat is evolved by burning 10.16g of graphite   10.16=  mole of graphite12
           = 0.843 mole of graphite
Hence enthalpy of combustion of graphite per mole   -1 332.89=  kJmol0.843
           = 395kJmol-1
Since heat is evolved during combustion, so the sign of the answer w ould be negative.   
           -1= -395 kJmol   Answer
7.5.0 HESS’S LAW OF CONSTANT HEAT SUMMATION
 There are many compounds, for which ∆H cannot be measured directly by calorimetric 
method. The reason is, that some compounds like tetrachloromethane (CC l4), cannot be prepared 
directly by combining carbon and chlorine. Similarly, it d oes not decompose easily into its constituent 
elements. In the same way, boron oxide (B2O3) and aluminium oxide (Al2O3) provide problems for 
the measurement of standard enthalpies of their formation. In these cas es, it is diicult to burn 
these elements completely in oxygen, because a protective layer of oxides c overs the surface of 
the unreacted element. Similarly, heat of formation of CO cannot be m easured directly due to the 
formation of CO2 with it.277.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 As  a result, of above mentioned problems, the chemists had to look for methods of obtaining 
standard enthalpies of formation indirectly. The energy cycle s hows two routes for converting 
graphite and oxygen to CO2, whilst the alternative route goes via CO. It would seem reasonable 
that the overall enthalpy change for the conversion of graphite to CO i s independent of the route 
taken, that is,
      12H =  H + H  ....................... (8)∆ ∆∆
 If  the enthalpy of combustion for graphite to form CO2 and the enthalpy of combustion of CO 
to form CO2 are known, we can determine the enthalpy of formation for CO. To c lear the idea look 
at the following cycle. The oxidation of carbon (graphite) can be written as follows.
    
    
    
 
Applying equation (8)   12H =   H  + H∆∆∆
 or    12H  =  H - H∆ ∆∆
     = -393- (-283)  
     -1= -110kJ mol
 So, the enthalpy change for the formation of CO(g) is -110.0 k Jmol-1.
 The method we have just used in obtaining equation (8), is a spec iic example of Hess’s law of 
constant heat summation. This law states that
 If a chemical change takes place by several diferent routes, the overa ll energy change is the 
same, regardless of the route by which the chemical change occurs , provided the initial and inal 
conditions are the same.
 Let A can be converted to D directly in a single step and heat evolved i s ∆H. If the reaction can 
have a route from ABC→→  as shown below.
  ΔH
22C   +   O    CO  →
 
1H∆
     21O2          21O2   2H∆
  
       CO -1
(graphite) 2(g) 2(g) (graphite)C  + O  CO            H =-393.7kJ mol →∆
-1
(gas) 2(g) 2(g) 21CO  + O CO H (CO)=-283kJ mol2→∆
(graphite) 2(g) (g) 11C + O   CO                 H (CO) ?2→ ∆=287.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
According to Hess’s law, 123H =   H  + H + H∆∆∆∆
 Mathematically, H(cycle) = 0 ∑∆
 
 Of course, Hess’s law is simply an application of the more
 fundamental law of conservation of energy. So, S∆H (cycle) = 0
It means that if one goes form A to D directly and comes back to A thr ough B and C then ∆H = 0.
 The formation of sodium carbonate, is another example for the veriica tion of Hess’s law. 
The formation of sodium carbonate may be studied as a single step process, or in two steps as via 
sodium hydrogen carbonate. HA  D∆ →  
     1H∆     3H∆ 
  2HBC∆  →  
Animation 7.15: HESS’S LAW OF CONSTANT HEAT SUMMATI ON
Source & Credit : jeremykun297.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Single Step Process
  
Two Step Process
  
  
 According to Hess’s law,
   12 H    =   H  + H ............ (8)∆ ∆∆
 Putting the values of ∆H, 1H∆, 2H∆, in equation (8)
   -89.08 =-48.06-41.02
   -89.08 =-89.08
 This  illustrates, how heats of reactions may be added algebra ically and this proves Hess’s 
law. Hess’s law inds its best applications in Born-Haber cy cle.
7.5.1  The Bom-Haber Cycle
 This cycle has wide applications. It inds its special app lications in Hess’s law. It states that 
energy change in a cyclic process is always zero. It enables  us, to calculate the lattice energies of 
binary ionic compounds such as M+X-.
 The  lattice energy of an ionic crystal is the enthalpy of forma tion of one mole of the ionic 
compound from gaseous ions under standard conditions.
 Thus, the lattice energy of NaCl corresponds to the following p rocess.(aq) 2(g) 2 3(aq) 2 (l)2NaOH  + CO  Na CO  + H O                H= -8 9.08 kJ →∆
(aq) 2(g) 3(aq) 1NaOH  + CO  NaHCO                        H =  -48.06 kJ →∆
3(aq) (aq) 2 3(aq) 2 ( ) 2NaHCO  + NaOH  Na CO +H O              H = -41. 02 kJ →∆
+ - + - o -1
(g) (g) (s) LattNa  + Cl           Na Cl                  H  =   -787  kJ  mol →∆307.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 Lattice  energies cannot be determined directly but values can be ob tained indirectly by means 
of an energy cycle. In Fig (7.8), an energy triangle of sodi um chloride is shown.
 
 
 
Since, ∆Ho
f, the  standard enthalpy of formation of sodium chloride, can be measured conveniently 
in a calorimeter.  ∆H°l, can be obtained if  ∆Hx, which is the total energy involved in changing sodium 
and chlorine from their normal physical states to gaseous ions, can be calculated. 
 In Fig (7.9), the  previous energy triangle has been extended to s how the various stages 
involved in inding ∆Hx. The complete energy cycle is called a Born -Haber cycle.
Fig (7.8) Energy triangle for sodium chloride317.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
 
It is clear from the picture of Born-Haber cycle in Fig (7.9)  that
    x at(Na) i(Na) at(Cl) e(Cl)H  =  H  + H  + H  + H∆∆ ∆ ∆ ∆
 The irst two stages in this process involve atomizing and the ionizi ng of sodium. The heat of 
atomization of sodium can be obtained from values of its heat of fus ion, heat of vaporization and 
speciic heat capacity. The irst ionization energy of sodium can be determined spectroscopically.
 The  third and fourth stages in the expression for ∆Hx above, involve the atomization of 
chlorine and the conversion of chlorine atoms to chloride ions, res pectively. The later process is, of 
course, called the electron ainity of chlorine.
 The heat of atomization of chlorine can be obtained from spectroscopic  studies:
Fig (7.9) Born-Haber cycle
-1
(s) (g)Na    Na                                  H =108kJ mol →∆at
-1
(g) (g)Na    Na  +1e                              H =496kJ mol−→∆i
-1
2(g) (g) at1Cl    Cl                              H =12 1 kJ mol2→∆327.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
  
whilst, the electron ainity for chlorine can also be found by sim ilar methods.
   
Thus 
The lattice energy for sodium chloride can thus be obtained:
      oo
fxH   =  H  + H∆ ∆∆
      oo
fx H   =  H  - H∆ ∆∆
Using the values from Fig (7.9)
      -1H  = -411-376 = -787 kJ mol∆
 The  lattice energy, gives us some idea of the force of attraction betw een Na+ and Cl- ions in 
crystalline sodium chloride. Lattice energies are very helpful in  discussing the structure, bonding 
and properties of ionic compounds.-1
xH  = (108+496+121-349) = 376 kJ mol∆-1
(g) (g)Cl  + e    Cl                             H = -349 kJ mol−−→∆e
Animation 7.16: The Bom -H aber Cycle
Source & Credit : climate.gov337.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
KEY POINTS
1.  Substances exist because they possess energy. Energy can b e transformed in form of heat and 
the study of heat changes accompanying a chemical reaction is called thermochemistry.
2.  Whenever, a reaction happens, then the driving force is the en thalpy change, along with the 
entropy change. Both these parameters decide upon spontaneity of reaction .
3.  Most of the thermodynamic parameters are state functions.
4.  First law of themodynamics is the law of conservation of energy  and helps us to understand the 
equivalence of heat and work.
5.  When heat is supplied to the system at constant pressure, then i t is the enthalpy change of the 
system. Anyhow, at constant volume, the heat supplied is just equa l to internal energy change.
6.  There is diference between heat and temperature. The amount of heat evol ved or absorbed 
can be measured in laboratory by using glass calorimeter or b omb calorimeter. The amount of 
heat is calculated from mass of the reactants, speciic heat and c hange of temperature. Hess’s 
law of heat summation is another form of irst law of thermodynamic s. It helps us to determine 
the enthalpy changes of those chemical reactions, which can not b e carried out in laboratory or 
heat changes are diicult to measure.
7.  According to  Born-Haber cycle, another form of Hess’s law,  the energy change in a cyclic process 
is always equal to zero. With the help of this cycle, we can ca lculate lattice energy of ionic crystals.347.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q.1  Select the suitable answer from the given choices.
(i)  If an endothermic reaction is allowed to take place very rapid ly in the air, the temperature of the 
surrounding air
(a)  remains constant    (b)  increases
(c)  decreases      (d)  remains unchanged
(ii)  In endothermic reactions, the heat content of the
(a)  products is more than that of reactants
(b)  reactants is more than that of products
(c)  both (a) and (b)
(d)  reactants and products are equal
(iii)  Calorie is equivalent to
(a)  0.4184J   (b)  41.84J   (c)  4.184J   (d)  418 .4J
(iv)  The change  in heat energy of a chemical reaction at constan t temperature and pressure is 
called
(a)  enthalpy change   (c)  heat of sublimation
(b)  bond energy    (d)  internal energy change
(v)  Which of the following statements is contrary to the irst law of thermodynamics?
(a)  Energy can neither be created nor destroyed.
(b)  One form of energy can be transferred into an equivalent amoun t of other kinds of energy.
(c) In an adiabatic process, the work done is independent of its path.
(d)  Continuous production of mechanical work without supplying  an equivalent amount of heat is  
 possible.
(vi)  For a given process, the heat changes at constant pressure (qp) and at constant volume (qv) 
are related to each other as
 pv pv pv pv(a) q =q       (b) q <q       (c) q >q       ( d) q =q /2
(vii)  For the reaction: 2 NaOH+HCl NaCl+H O → the change in enthalpy is called
(a)  heat of reaction    (b)  heat of formation
(c)  heat of neutralization   (d)  heat of combustion
(viii)  The net  heat change in a chemical reaction is same,wh ether it is brought about in two or 
more diferent ways in one or several steps. It is known as
(a)  Henry’s law    (b)  Joule’s principle
(c)  Hess’s law     (d)  Law of conservation of energy357.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
(ix)  Enthalpy of neutralization of all the strong acids and s trong bases has the same value because
(a)  neutralization leads to the formation of salt and water.
(b)  strong acids and bases are ionic substances.
(c)  acids always give rise to H+ ions and bases always furnish OH- ions.
(d)  the net chemical change involve the combination of H+ and OH- ions to form water.
Q.2  Fill in the blanks with suitable words.
(i)  The substance undergoing a physical or a chemical cha nge forms a chemical .
(ii)  The change in internal energy__________ be measured.
(iii)  Solids which have more than one crystalline forms posse ss_______ values of heats of formation.
(iv)  A process is called________ if it takes place on its own  without any external assistance.
(v)  A________ is a macroscopic property of a system which is__________ of the path adopted to  
          bring about that change.
Q.3  Indicate the true or false as the case may be.
(i)  It is necessary that a spontaneous reaction should be exothermi c.
(ii)  Amount of heat absorbed at constant volume is internal energy c hange.
(iii)  The work done by the system is given the positive sign.
(iv)  Enthalpy is a state function but internal energy is not.
(v)  Total heat content of a system is called enthalpy of the system.
Q.4  Deine the following terms and give three examples of each
(i)  System     (v)  Exothermic reaction
(ii)  Surroundings    (vi)  Endothermic reaction
(iii)  State function    (vii)  Internal energy of the system
(iv)  Units of energy    (viii)  Enthalpy of the system
Q.5
(a)  Diferentiate between the following:
(i)  Internal energy and enthalpy
(ii)  Internal energy change and enthalpy change
(iii)  Exothermic and endothermic reactions
(b)  Deine the following enthalpies and give two examples of each.
(i)  Standard enthalpy of reaction
(ii)  Standard enthalpy of combustion
(iii)  Standard enthalpy of atomization
(iv)  Standard enthalpy of solution367.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Q.6  (a)  What are spontaneous and non-spontaneous processes. Give examples.
(b)  Explain that burning of a candle is a spontaneous proc ess.
(c)  Is it true that a non-spontaneous process never happens in the u niverse? Explain it.
Q.7  (a)  What is the irst law of thermodynamics. How does it ex plain that
(i) vq=E∆   (ii) pq=H∆
(b)  How will you diferentiate  between ∆E and ∆H? Is it true that ∆H and ∆E have the same 
values for  the reactions taking place in the solution state.
Q.8  
(a)  What is the diference between heat and temperature? Write a mathem atical relationship   
 between these two parameters.
(b)  How do you measure the heat of combustion of a substance by bom b calorimeter.
Q.9  Deine heat of neutralization. When a dilute solution of a strong acid is neutralized by a dilute 
solution of a strong base, the heat of neutralization is found to be nearly the same in all the cases. 
How do you account for this?
Q. 10  
(a)  State  the laws of thermochemistry and show how are they based on the irst law of 
thermodynamics.
(b)  What is a thermochemical equation. Give three examples. What i nformation do they 
convey?
(c) Why is it necessary to mention the physical states of reactants  and products in a 
thermochemical reaction? Apply, Hess’s law to justify your ans wer.
Q .11 
(a)  Deine and explain Hess’s law of constant heat summation. Ex plain it with examples 
and give its application.
(b)  Hess’s law helps us, to calculate the heats of those reactions,  which cannot be normally 
carried out in a laboratory. Explain it.
Q.12  
(a)  What  is lattice energy? How does Born-Haber cycle help to ca lculate the lattice energy 
of NaCl?
(b)  Justify that heat of formation of compound is the sum of all  the other enthalpies.377.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Q. 13  50 cm3 of 1.0 M HCl is mixed with 50 cm3 of 1.00 M NaOH in a glass calorimeter. The 
temperature of the resultant mixture  increases from 21.0°C to 27.5 °C. Assume, that calorimeter 
losses of heat are negligible. Calculate the enthalpy change mole-1 for the reactions. The density of 
solution to be considered is 1gcm-3 and speciic heat is 4.18Jg-1k-1. 
(Ans: -54 kJ mol-1)
Q .14  Hydrazine (N2H4) is a rocket fuel. It burns in O2 give N2 and H2O.
  
1.00 g of N2H4 is  burned in a bomb calorimeter. An increase of temperature 3. 510C is recorded. The 
speciic heat of calorimeter is 5.5kJK-1g-1. Calculate the quantity of heat evolved. Also, calculate the 
heat of combustion of 1 mole of N2H4.
(Ans: -19.3kJ, -618kJmol-1)
Q. 15  Octane (C8H18) is a motor fuel. 1.80 g of a sample of octane is burned in a  bomb calorimeter 
having heat capacity 11.66 kJK-1. The  temperature of the calorimeter increases from 21.360C to 
28.780C. Calculate the heat of combustion for 1.8g of octane. Also, calcu late the heat for 1 mole of 
octane.
(Ans: 86.51kJ, -5478.84kJmol-1)
Q.16   By applying, Hess’s law calculate the enthalpy chan ge for the formation of an aqueous 
solution of NH4Cl from NH3 gas and HCl gas. The results for the various reactions  are a s follows.
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(Ans:  -159.08 kJ mol-1)
Q.17  Calculate the heat of formation of ethyl alcohol from the follow ing information
(i)  Heat of combustion of ethyl alcohol is -1367 kJ mol-1
(ii) Heat of formation of carbon dioxide is-393.7 kJ mol-1
(iii)  Heat of formation of water is -285.8 kJ mol-1 
(Ans:-278.4 kcal mol-1)2 2( ) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)N H   +  O   N   +  2H O →
-1
3(g) 3(aq)NH  + aq  NH                                   H=-35.16kJ mol →∆
-1
(g) (aq)HCl  + aq  HCl                                     H=-72.41kJ mol →∆
-1
3(aq) (aq) 4 (aq)NH  +  HCl NH Cl                      H=-51. 48kJ mol →∆387.THERMOCHEMISTRY eLearn.Punjab
Q.18   If  the heats of combustion of C2H4, H2 and C2H6 are -337.2, -68.3 and -372.8k calories 
respectively, then calculate the heat of the following reaction.
    
Q.19   Graphite and diamond are  two forms of carbon. The enthal py of combustion of graphite 
at 250C is -393.51 kJ mol-1 and that of diamond is -395.41 kJ mol-1. What is the enthalpy change of the 
process?
Graphite → Diamond at the same temperature? 
(Ans: 1.91 kJmol-1)
Q.20   What  is the meaning of the term enthalpy of ionization? If  the heat of neutralization of 
HCl and NaOH is -57.3 kJ mol-1 and heat of neutralization of CH3COOH with NaOH is -55.2 kJ mol-1, 
calculate the enthalpy of ionization of CH3COOH. 
(Ans: 2.1 kJmol-1)
Q.21  
(a)  Explain what is meant by the following terms.
  (i)  Atomization energy
  (ii)  Lattice energy
(b)  Draw a complete, fully  labeled Born-Haber cycle for the for mation of potassium bromide.
(c)  Using  the information given in the table below, calculate th e lattice energy of potassium 
bromide.
Reactions -1H/kJ mol∆
-392
+90
+420
+112
-342
(Ans: -672 kJ mol-1)2 4(g) 2(g) 2 6(g)CH + H CH →
+-
(s) 2( ) (s)12K + / Br K Br →
(s) (g)KK→
(g) (g)K K +e+−→
2( ) (g)1/2Br Br →
(g) (g)Br +e Br−−→