CHAPTER
4 The Cell
Animation 4.1: Plant cell
Source & Credit: Wiki.gcc24. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The cell can be deined as the structural and functional unit of life. It is the smallest unit that can 
carry out all activities of life. Cells are building blocks of complex multicellular organisms.
EMERGENCE AND IMPLICATION OF CELL THEORY
Study of cell (cell biology) began with the discovery of cell by R obert Hooke (1665), who reported 
his work in his famous publication Micrographia . He prepared and studied thin sections of cork (of 
dead plant material) under his self-made compound microscope.
He observed that the cork is composed of minute honey comb like compartmen ts which he termed 
as Cells (Fig.4.1). According to Hooke, cell is an empty spac e bounded by thick walls. Very little 
information was added to this idea in the following century. The w ork again started in the beginning 
of 19th century.
Lorenz Oken (1805) a German scientist , believed that 
“all living beings originate from or consist of vesicles or 
cells”. Jean Baptist de-Lamarck (1809) expressed similar 
idea and said “no body can have life if its constituent 
parts are not cellular tissue or are not formed by 
cellular tissue”.
In 1831 Robert Brown reported the presence of nucleus 
in the cell. Due to this discovery Hooke’s idea about 
the cell as an empty space was changed. It was later 
established that cell is not an empty space. A German 
zoologist Theodor Schwann (1839) and a German 
botanist Schleiden (1838), working independently, 
came out with a theory called the Cell Theory.
They found that the cell consisted of 3 basic parts, viz 
nucleus, the luid (cytoplasm) surrounding the nucleus, and a n outer thin covering or membrane  
(plasma membrane). The cell wall, they said, was an additi onal structure, present only in plant 
cell. Keeping in view this deinition of cell, the cells could be obs erved in plant as well as in animal; 
according to cell theory, all living organisms are composed of cel ls and cell products.Fig.4.1 The microscopic structure of a      
piece of cork34. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The cell theory is one of the most fundamental generalizations in Biol ogy. It has wide ranging efect 
in all ields of biological sciences. After the cell theory was pr esented, many details of cell were 
studied, as a result of which the cell theory was extended.
Rudolph Virchow (1855), a German physician, hypothesized tha t new cells were formed only 
by the division of previously existing living cells (to put it in V irchow’s words : “omnis cellula e 
cellula”). It was contrary to the idea of “abiogenesis” (living th ings arise spontaneously from non-
living things), one of the prevailing but controversial ideas about or igin of life, at that time. Louis 
Pasteur (1862), one of the greatest scientists of all times, supplied  experimental proof for Virchow’s 
hypothesis by demonstrating that microorganisms (bacteria) could be formed only from existing 
bacteria. Original cell theory and Virchow’s hypothesis gave us  the basis for working deinition of 
living things: living things are chemical organizations compos ed of cells and capable of reproducing 
themselves’. August Weismann (1880) said ‘all presently living  cells have a common origin because 
they have basic similarities in structure and molecules etc. It wa s shown that there are fundamental 
similarities in the chemical composition, metabolic activities and structure, although they difer in 
many respects. Cells are basically similar but extraordinari ly versatile. Cell is not only the structural 
but also the functional unit of living organisms. So cell theory i s a very important unifying concept
The human naked eye can diferentiate between two points, which are at least 1.0 mm apart. 
This is known as resolution of the eye. This resolution can be inc reased with the aid of lenses. In 
a typical compound microscope the resolution is 2.0 nm, which is about 500X that of naked eye. 
A compound microscope is a typical laboratory microscope with at least diferent magniication 
powers. The typical ocular lenses could be 5X and 10X, but other s also exist. Likewise diferent 
types of objective lenses viz. 20X, 40X, 100X etc exist. The magnii cation power of microscope is 
determined by multiplying X values of ocular lense and X value of  objective lense. Therefore, a
microscope with 10X ocular lens and 40X objective lense will have (10X40 = 400X) 400X magnifying 
power. The resolution will, however, remain the same, which is 500 X that of the naked eye. The 
source of illumination in such microscopes is visible light. In electron microscope the source 
of illumination is a beam of electrons and the resolution of microsc ope ranges between 2-4 
Angstrom, which make it 500X greater than that of the compound mic roscope and 250,000X 
greater than that of the naked eye. This means that two points which a re 2-4 Angstrom apart 
can be diferentiated with the help of electron microscope. The revelation of  complexity of 
structure of various cellular organelles is closely linked with th e development of microscopy 
and improvement in the resolution power of the microscope.44. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The salient features of Cell Theory in its present form are:
(1) All organisms are composed of one or more cells.
(2) All cells arise from pre-existing cells.
(3) Cell is the basic structural as well as functional unit for all organisms.
Cell as a unit of structure and function
A cell is a unit of structure and function in living organism s. In multicellular organisms there is a 
division of labour among cells. Diferent cells are specialized for  diferent functions. The function 
of the organism as a whole is the result of the sum of activities and  interactions of diferent cells 
and of diferent components of the cell. In animals e.g., muscle c ells contract and relax, nerve 
cells transmit impulses, gland cells secrete, red blood cells ca rry oxygen and some stomach cells 
secrete gastric juice. Similarly in plants xylem cells conduc t water and mineral salts from soil to 
the aerial parts of the plant. Phloem cells translocate food, sclerenc hymatous cells give support to 
the plants, chlorenchymatous cells carry out photosynthesis, parenc hymatous cells store surplus 
food and meristematic cells produce new cells for growth and developm ent of the plant. As they 
perform diferent functions they show great variation in shape and s ize. Despite the structural and 
functional diversity, the plant cells as well as animal cells have a common plan of organization.
STRUCTURE OF A GENERALIZED CELL
Structure of a cell can be studied under light microscope as well  as electron microscope. The modem 
technology enables us to isolate various components of cells including  its organelles by a process 
of cell fractionation and study their structure and function in d etail. During cell fractionation the 
tissues are homogenized or disrupted with special instruments and the various parts of the cells 
are separated by density gradient centrifugation. This separation is achieved by spinning the 
homogenized or disrupted cells in a special medium in a centrif uge at medium speed. The various 
cellular parts separate out in diferent layers depending upon their  size and weight, and density of 
the medium. Some cellular components require very high speeds for sep aration from other parts 
of the cells. This is achieved through ultracentrifugation.54. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1A cell consists of the following basic components:
1. Plasma membrane, also a cell wall in plant cell.
2. Cytoplasm, containing cell organelles.
3. Nucleus, with nuclear or chromatin material.
In the traditional system of classiication all organisms are di vided into plants and animals. The 
cells of plants and animals can be distinguished by the pres ence or absence of cell wall. Cells of
                                                   
                                                         
                                                                Fig.4.2: Electron microscope structure of a anim al cell.64. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                Fig. 4.3 Electron microscopic structure of a pla nt cell
Image 4.2: Structure of Animal Cell 
Source and Credit: wikipedia74. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1animals and plants absence of cell wall. Cells of animals and plants are complex and have a 
distinct nucleus (chromatin material is bounded by a membrane)  and are called Eukaryotic. On the 
other hand, the primitive type of cells, such as bacteria, lack a  deinite nucleus and are said to be 
Prokaryotic. In Prokaryotes the nuclear material is directly subm erged in the cytoplasm and is not 
separated from it by membranes.
The eukaryotic cells vary greatly in size. They could be as big  as an Ostrich’s egg. Most of the cells 
are microscopic and are not visible to the naked eye. Their size is measured in micrometer ( nm). 
One nm is 0.000,001 meter or 1x 10-6 of a metre.
The use of modern technology has made it possible to study the followin g components of the cell 
in detail (Fig.4.2 and 4.3).
Image 4.3: Animal Plant Cell
Source and Credit: thegreatestgarden84. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Plasma Membrane
Plasma membrane or cell membrane is the outer most boundary of the c ell. However, in most plant 
cells, it is covered by a cell wall. Cell membrane is chemical ly composed of lipids and proteins; 60 
- 80% are proteins, while 20-40% are lipids. In addition ther e is a small quantity of carbohydrates.
Many biologists contributed to establish the structural organization of cell membrane. It was 
proposed earlier that cell membrane is composed of lipid bilayer s andwiched between inner and 
outer layers of protein (Fig.4.4). This, basic structure is ca lled the unit membrane  and is present in all 
the cellular organelles. The modem technology has revealed that lipid bilayers are not sandwiched 
between two protein layers.
The protein layers are not continuous and are not conined to the surfac e of the membrane but 
are embedded in lipid layers in a mosaic manner (Fig.4.5).  This discovery led to the proposal of 
Fluid Mosaic Model . This model at present is the most accepted one. Cell membrane also c ontains 
charged pores through which movement of materials takes place, both b y active and passive 
transport.
Fig: 4.4. Unit membrane94. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                      
Fig. 4.5. Fluid Mosaic Model
Transport of materials is one of the vital roles it plays for the cell . It ofers a barrier between the 
cell contents and their environment, allowing only selective substances to pass through it, thus it 
is known as diferentially permeable  or selectively permeable membrane. The substances which 
are lipid soluble cross it more easily than others, therefore, it regu lates the low of materials and 
ions to maintain a deinite gradient. Many small gas molecules, water, glucose etc. being neutral can 
easily cross while ions, being charged particles, have some dii culty in crossing. Many substances
which are not needed, constantly enter the cell by passive transport, oth ers are taken up against 
the concentration gradient (they move from the area of low concentration to the area of high 
concentration). This uphill movement of materials requires energy an d is termed as active transport. 
The energy used for this movement is provided by ATP.
In many animal cells, the cell membrane helps to take in materia ls by infolding in the form of 
vacuoles. This type of intake is termed as endocytosis  which can be either phagocytosis  (to engulf104. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1solid particles) or pinocytosis  (to take in liquid material). In neurons (nerve cells) the cell m embrane
transmits nerve impulses from one part of the body to the other to keep coordi nation.
Cell Wall
The outer most boundary in most of the plant cells is cell wall. T he cell wall of plant cell is diferent from 
that of prokaryotes, both in structure and chemical composition. It i s secreted by the protoplasm 
of the cell. Its thickness varies in diferent cells of the plant. It is composed of three main layers: 
primary wall, secondary wall and the middle lamella. The middle lamella  is irst to be formed in 
between the primary walls  of the neighbouring cells. The primary wall is composed of cel lulose 
and some deposition of pectin and hemicelluloses. Cellulose molecules are arranged in a criss 
cross arrangement (Fig.4.6). The primary wall is a true wa ll and develops in newly growing cells. The 
secondary wall  is formed on its inner surface and is comparatively thick and  rigid. Chemically it is 
composed of inorganic salts, silica, waxes, cutin lignin etc.  Prokaryotic cell wall lacks cellulose; its 
strengthening material is peptidoglycan or murein. Fungal cell wall contains chitin.
Fig.4.6. Secret of the strength of plant structure is revealed  by electron microscope photographs of the cell walls. The cel lulose ibers 
are arranged in layers, with the ibres of each layer at right angle to those of other layers.114. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Cell wall is very important. It provides a deinite shape to the cell a nd keeps it rigid. It does not act 
as a barrier to the materials passing through it.
Cytoplasm
The living contents of the eukaryotic cell are divided into nucleus an d the cytoplasm, the two 
collectively form protoplasm. Cytoplasm consists of an aqueous groun d substance containing a 
variety of cell organelles and other inclusions such as insolubl e wastes and storage products. The 
soluble part of the cytoplasm is called cytosol . It forms the ground substance of the cytoplasm. 
Chemically it is about 90% water. It forms a solution containing  all the fundamental molecules of 
life. In the cytosol, small molecules and ions may form true solu tions, and some large molecules 
form colloidal solutions. Colloidal solution may be a sol (non-viscous) or a gel (viscous). Peripheral 
parts of the cell are often like a gel.
The most important function of the cytoplasm is to act as a store house of vital chemicals. It is also 
a site for certain metabolic processes such as glycolysis.
In living cells the cytoplasm contains several cell organelles suc h as endoplasmic reticulum, 
mitochondria, Golgi complex, nucleus, plastids, ribosomes, lysos omes and centriole. The free 
loating cell organelles e.g.  mitochondria move about in cytoplasm d ue to cytoplasmic streaming 
movements. This is an active mass movement of cytoplasm.Animation 4.2: Cell Wall
Source and Credit: gifsoup124. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Endoplasmic Reticulum
Under an electron microscope a network of channels is seen extending th roughout the cytoplasm. 
These channels are often continuous with plasma membrane and als o appear to be in contact 
with the nuclear membrane. This entire system of channels is the E ndoplasmic Reticulum. These 
membranes vary widely in appearance from cell to cell. The materi al present in these channels is 
separated from the cytoplasmic materials by the spherical or tubul ar membranes, called cisternae .
There are two morphological forms of endoplasmic reticulum; a roug h form with attached 
ribosomes and a smooth form without ribosomes. The rough surfaced en doplasmic reticulum (RER) 
is involved in the synthesis of proteins. 
After synthesis the proteins are either 
stored in the cytoplasm or exported 
out of the cell through these channels. 
The smooth surfaced endoplasmic 
reticulum (SER) helps in metabolism 
of a number of diferent types of 
molecules particularly lipids. They also 
help to detoxify the harmful drugs. 
In some cells SER is responsible for 
transmission of impulses, e.g. muscle 
cells, nerve cells. In addition, SER also 
plays an important role in the transport 
of materials from one part of the cell to 
the other. Endoplasmic reticulum also 
provides mechanical support to the cell 
so that its shape is maintained.
Animation 4.3: Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum
Source and Credit: Ameoba sisters134. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 4.7: Rough endoplasmic reticulum is marked by the pre sence of ribosomes attached to the membranes of endoplasmic re ticulum. 
Proteins synthesized on ribosomes are pushed into channels of endoplasmic reticulum, from where they are transported to Golgi  
Apparatus, on their way out of the cell.
Ribosomes
Cell contains many tiny granular structures known as ribosomes . Palade (1955) was the irst person 
to study them. Eukaryotic ribosomes are composed of an almost equal a mount of RNA and protein, 
hence they are ribonucleo-proteins particles. The RNA present in rib osome is called ribosomal 
RNA. Ribosomes exist in two forms; either freely dispersed in cytopl asm or attached with RER as 
tiny granules. Each eukaryotic ribosome consists of two sub-units . The larger subunit sediments 
at 60S (S= Svedberg unit used in ultracentrifugation), while sm aller subunit sediments at 40S. Two 
subunits on attachment with each other form 80S particle. This atta chment is controlled by the 
presence of Mg2+ ions. The ribosomes are attached to messenger RNA through small ri bosomal 
subunit. A group of ribosomes attached to mRNA is known as polysome  (Fig. 4.8).144. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                           
Fig. 4.8 mRNA attached to ribosomes forming polysomes.
New ribosomes are assembled in the nucleolus of the nucleus from wh ere they are transported to 
the cytoplasm via the pores in nuclear membrane. The factory of rib osome is the nucleolus, while 
that of protein synthesis is the ribosomes.Animation 4.4: Ribosomes
Source and Credit: Nature154. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 4.5: Ribosomes
Source and Credit: nature164. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Golgi Apparatus
Golgi apparatus was discovered by Golgi in 1898. This appara tus, which was found virtually in all 
eukaryotic cells, consists of stacks of lattened, membrane bound sa cs, called cisternae. These 
cisternae together with associated vesicles are called Golgi complex. It is a complex system of 
interconnected tubules around the central stacks. Cisternae stacks ar e continuously formed by 
fusion of vesicles, which are probably derived by the budding of  SER. Their outer convex surface is 
the forming face, while the inner concave surface is the maturing face. The cisternae break up into 
vesicles from the latter. The whole stack consists of a number of cis ternae thought to be moving 
from the outer to the inner face.
 Fig. 4.9 Golgi Complex174. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                    
Fig. 4.10. :This igure shows relationship of endoplasmic reti culum with Golgi Apparatus, lysosome and plasma membrane.  Golgi 
Apparatus has two ends, Forming Face and Maturation Face. Blebs from tips of SER fuse with Golgi Apparatus cisternae at  Forming 
Face, whereas secretory granules.
(transport vesicles) are pinched of at the Maturation Face of Golgi Ap paratus. The arrows show the 
direction of low of protein product systhesized on ribosomes. These protei ns are converted into 
glycoproteins in the Golgi Apparatus.
Golgi complex is concerned with cell secretions. Secretions are produc ts formed within the cell on 
ribosomes and then passed to the outside through endoplasmic reticulum  and Golgi Apparatus. The 
secretions are converted into inished product and are packed inside m embrane, before export. For 
example in mammals, the pancreas secretes granules containing en zymes that help in digestion. 
The Golgi complex has a role in formation of these granules. The pr oteins or enzymes which have 
to be transported out of the cell pass through the Golgi Apparatus. The most important function of 
this apparatus is to modify the proteins and lipids by adding  carbohydrates and converting them 
into glycoproteins or glycolipids.184. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Lysosomes
Lysosomes are cytoplasmic organelles and are diferent from others du e to their morphology. 
These were isolated as a separate component for the irst time by De Duve (19 49). Lysosomes (Lyso 
= splitting; soma = body) are found in most eukaryotic cells. A ny foreign object that gains entry into 
the cell is immediately engulfed by the lysosome and is completely b roken into simple digestible 
pieces. The process is known as phagocytosis (eating process of a  cell). They are most abundant in 
those animal cells which exhibit phagocytic activity. They are b ounded by a single membrane and 
are simple sacs rich in acid phosphatase and several other hyd rolytic enzymes. These enzymes are 
synthesized on RER and are further processed in the Golgi apparatu s. The processed enzymes are
budded of as Golgi vesicles and are called as primary lysosomes  (Fig.4.11). Lysosomes contain 
those enzymes which can digest the phagocytosed food particles.Animation 4.6: Golgi Apparatus
Source and Credit: Ameoba sisters194. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 4.11: Lysosomes protect the cells from invading organisms or any other foreign object, (food) which are engulfed in the cell  as 
phagocytic vacuoles. These fuse with primary lysosomes to form digestive vacuole (secondary lysosome) in which various lys osomal 
enzymes digest various.
components of the vacuole. Some times, under abnormal circumstances, e.g. starvation, or as a 
normal physiological process the parts of the cell are engulfed by  primary lysosomes and digested 
to generate energy. The lysosomes which eat parts of their own cell are known as autophagosomes. 
The digestive vacuoles and autophagosomes are also known as Secondary  Lysosomes. 
They are also involved in the autophagy (self eating). During this process some old, worn out parts 
of cell, such as old mitochondria are digested. In this way, m aterials of cell may be recycled and cell 
may be renewed. Their enzymes can also result in degeneration of cel l, as may occur during some 
developmental processes. Lysosomes also release enzymes for extra cellula r digestion.
Several congenital diseases have been found to be due to accumulation wi thin the cell of substances 
such as glycogen or various glycolipids. These are also called  storage diseases and are produced 
by a mutation that efect one of the lysosomal enzymes involved in the catab olism of a certain 
substance. For example, in glycogenosis type II disease, the liver and muscle appear illed with 
glycogen within membrane bound organelles. In this disease, an enzyme that degrades glycogen to 
glucose, is absent. About twenty such diseases are known these days , which are because of absence 
of a particular enzyme. For example Tay-Sach’s disease is bec ause of absence of an enzyme that is
involved in the catabolism of lipids. Accumulation of lipids in  brain cells lead to mental retardation 
and even death.204. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 4.7: Lysosomes
Source and Credit: Ameoba sisters214. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Peroxisome
De-Duve and coworkers isolated in 1965 particles from liver cells an d other tissues which were 
enriched with some oxidative enzymes, such as peroxidase, catalase,  glycolic acid oxidase and some 
other enzymes. The name peroxisome was applied because this organell e is speciically involved in 
the formation and decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in the cell.
These are single membrane enclosed cytoplasmic organelles found both  in animal and plant 
cells. These are characterised by containing H202 - producing oxidases and catalase. They are 
approximately 0.5 nm in diameter. They have also been found in protozoa, yeast and man y cell 
types of higher plants.
Glyoxysomes
Plants contain an organelle, which in addition to glycolic aci d oxidase and catalase also possess a 
number of enzymes that are not found in animal cells. These organ elles, called glyoxysomes are 
most abundant in plant seedlings, which rely upon stored fatty a cids to provide them with the 
energy and material to begin the formation of a new plant. One of the primary activities in these 
germinating seedlings is the conversion of stored fatty acids to carb ohydrates. This is achieved 
through a cycle, glyoxylate cycle, the enzymes of which are located  in the glyoxysomes.
In plants, peroxisomes play important role in both catabolic and anabolic pathways. In seeds rich 
in lipids such as castor bean and soyabeans, glyoxysomes ar e the sites for breakdown of fatty acids 
to succinate.
This organelle is present only during a short period in the germi nation of the lipid-rich seed and is 
absent in lipid-poor seed such as the pea.
Vacuoles
Although vacuoles are present both in animal and plant cells, they  are particularly large and 
abundant in plant cells often occupying a major portion of the cel l volume and forcing the remaining 
intracellular structures into a thin peripheral layer. These vacu oles are bounded by a single224. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1membrane and are formed by the coalescence of smaller vacuoles duri ng the plant’s growth and 
development. Vacuoles serve to expand the plant cell without diluting its cytoplasm and also 
function as sites for the storage of water and cell products or metabol ic intermediates.
The plant vacuole is the major contributor to the turgor that provides sup port for the individual 
plant cell and contributes to the rigidity of the leaves and younger p arts of the plants.
Animation 4.8: Vacuole
Source and Credit: Ameoba sisters234. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Cytoskeleton
Cytosol contains cytoskeletal fabric formed of microtubules , microilaments  and intermediate 
ilaments . The main proteins that are present in cytoskeleton are tubulin (in microtubules), 
actin, myosin, tropomyosin and others which are also found in m uscles. Several cell organelles 
are derived from special assemblies of microtubules, for examples cilia, lagella, basal bodies and 
centrioles. The movement of cyclosis and amoeboid movements are because of microilaments, 
whereas intermediate ilaments are involved in determination of cell shap e and integration of 
cellular compartments (Fig. 4.2).
Microtubules  are long, unbranched, slender tubulin protein structures. One ver y important 
function of mirotubules is their role in the assembly and disass embly of the spindle structure during 
mitosis.
Microilaments  are considerably more slender cylindres made up of contractile a ctin protein, 
linked to the inner face of the plasma membrane. They are involved in  internal cell motion.
Intermediate  ilaments have diameter in between those of microtubules & microilaments.  They 
play role in the maintenance of cell shape.
Centriole
Animal cells, and cells of some microorganisms and lower 
plants contain two centrioles located near the exterior 
surface of the nucleus. In cross section each centriole 
consists of a cylindrical array of nine microtubules. 
However, each of the nine microtubules is further 
composed of three tubules (Fig. 4.12). The two centrioles 
are usually placed at right angle to each other. Just 
before a cell divides, its centrioles duplicate and one pair 
migrates to the opposite side of the nucleus. The spindle 
then forms between them. They are absent in higher 
plants. Centrioles play important role in the location of 
furrowing during cell division, and in the formation of 
cilia.Animation 4.9: Centrioles 
Source and Credit: ibiblio244. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1               
                                    Fig. 4.12. Centrioles are made up of nine microtubule triplet s.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria are very important organelles of eukaryotic cells, becau se they are involved in the 
manufacture and supply of energy to the cell. They are also known  as powerhouses of the cell 
(Fig. 4.13). Under compound microscope they appear to be vesicles, rods or ilaments. Under an 
electron microscope, they show complex morphology. Although their numb er, shape and internal 
structure vary widely, a mitochondrion is bound by two membranes,  the outer membrane is 
smooth, while the inner membrane forms infoldings into the inner ch amber called mitochondrial 
matrix. These infolds are called cristae.  The mitochondrial membranes are similar in structure to 
other cell membranes. Detailed studies have shown that mitochondria als o contain DNA as well as 
ribosomes.
The presence of ribosomes and DNA indicates that some proteins are syn thesized in them. It is a 
self replicating organelle.
The inner surface of cristae in the mitochondrial matrix has sm all knob like structures known as F1 
particles (Fig. 4.13). Mitochondrial matrix contains in it a  large number of enzymes, coenzymes and 
organic and inorganic salts which help in several vital metabol ic processes like Kreb’s cycle, aerobic254. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1respiration, fatty acid metabolism etc. As a result of these metabolic  processes the energy extracted 
from the organic food is transformed into energy rich compound ATP  (adenosine triphosphate), 
and the ATP then provides energy to the cell on demand. The size and number of mitochondria 
varies and depends on the physiological activity of the cell.
Fig.4.13. : Diagrammatic representation of a mitochondrion cut l ongitudinally. The main features are shown. A crista is mad e of 
lipoprotein membrane containing diferent enzymes as well a s F1 Particles embedded in it. After a special processin g the inner 
mitochondrial membrane is ruptured and the F1 particles com e out on the surface.Animation 4.10: Mitochondria
Source and Credit: ibiblio264. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Mitochondria extract energy from diferent components of food and convert i t in the form of ATP. 
This energy is used for various cellular activities. The spent ener gy, which is in the form of ADP is 
regenerated by the mitochondria into ATP. Mitochondria is therefore desc ribed as power house of 
the cell.
Plastids
Membrane bound, mostly pigment containing bodies present in the cell s are called Plastids. Plastidr 
are present in plant cells only. 
There are three main types of plastids.
1. Chloroplasts
In photosynthetic plant cells, there are membrane bound structures con taining a green pigment, 
called chloroplasts. The green pigment is an organic compound, chlorophyll, which helps the cell to 
absorb light energy and utilize it to manufacture food. Chlorophyl l molecule resembles the haem 
group of haemoglobin, a protein used in the transport of oxygen. The main diference between 
these two molecules is that chlorophyll has Mg++ while haem has Fe++ as the central atom.Animation 4.11: Mitochondrial ATP synthase 
Source and Credit: Jon Lund Stefensen274. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Chloroplasts vary in their shape and size with a diameter of abou t 4-6 nm. Under light microscope 
they appear to be heterogeneous structures with small granules known a s grana  embedded in the 
matrix. Under electron microscope, a chloroplast shows three main com ponents, the envelope, 
the stroma and the thylakoid. The envelope is formed by a double membr ane, while stroma covers 
most of the volume of the chloroplast. Stroma is a luid which surrou nds the thylakoids. It contains 
proteins, some ribosomes and a small circular DNA. It is in th is part of the chloroplast where CO2 
is ixed to manufacture sugars. Some proteins are also synthesized in this part. Thylakoids are the 
lattened vesicles which arrange themselves to form grana and intergra na. A granum appears to be
a pile of thylakoids stacked on each other like coins. On an avera ge, there are 50 or more thylakoids 
piled to form one granum. On the layers of thylakoids chlorophyll  molecules are arranged and that 
is why granum appears to be green (Fig.4.14). Each granum  is interconnected with others by the 
non-green part called intergranum. Membranes of the grana are si tes where sun light energy is 
trapped and where ATP is formed. Chloroplasts are self-replicati ng organelles.
2. Chromoplasts
They impart colours to the plants other than green. They are present in  the petals of the lower and 
in the ripened fruit. They help in pollination and dispersal of  seeds. 
3. Leucoplasts
They are colourless. They are triangular, tubular or of some other shape. They are found in the 
underground parts of the plant and store food.
Fig. 4.14: Diagram of chloroplast showing the main structural com ponents.284. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1NUCLEUS
Presence of cell nucleus was reported in 1831 by Robert Brown. Its  early discovery was undoubtedly 
due to its prominence in many cells, where it stands out as sligh tly darker than the surrounding 
cytoplasm. It controls the life and activities of the cell. In anima l cells, it generally occupies the 
central space, while in the case of plant cells it is pushed towa rds periphery due to the presence 
of a large vacuole. Nucleus may be irregular or spherical in shape. Generally, the cells have one 
nucleus and are called mononucleate . On the other hand, the cells with two nuclei are binucleate 
and with more than two as multinucleate.
Nucleus is only visible when the cell is in non-dividing stage.  It contains chromatin network and 
soluble sap called nucleoplasm . In dividing cells, the nucleus disappears and the chromatin  material 
in it is replaced by chromosomes. The heredity material is in the form of chromosomes, which 
controls all the activities of the cell. DNA, RNA and proteins inclu ding enzymes form the chemical 
composition of the nucleus. Nucleus consists of nuclear membrane, nucleoli, nucleoplasm and 
chromosomes.
Nuclear Membrane
Nucleus is surrounded by a nuclear membrane which separates the nuclear material from the 
cytoplasm. The nuclear membrane is actually a nuclear envelope c omposed of two membranes. 
The outer membrane is at places continuous with the endoplasmic retic ulum, while the inner 
membrane encloses the nuclear content. The outer and the inner membranes  are continuous at 
certain points resulting in the formation of pores, the nuclear pores . The nuclear pores  allow the 
exchange of materials between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. The num ber of nuclear pores is 
highly variable. The undiferentiated cells (such as eggs) have numerous pores (about 30,000 per 
nucleus), whereas diferentiated cells such as erythrbcytes have onl y 3 or 4 pores/nucleus. Each 
pore has a deinite structure which controls the traic of substances passing through them (igs. 
4.7, 4.10 and 4.16).
Nucleolus
It is a darkly stained body within the nucleus, and is withou t any membranous boundary to separate 
it from the rest of the nuclear material. There may be one or more nucl eoli in the nucleus. The 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized and stored in the nucleolus . It is composed of two regions, 
the peripheral granular area composed of precursors of ribosomal subunits and the central ibrill294. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1area consisting of large molecular weight RNA and rDNA. It is the nucleolus where ribosomes are 
assembled and are then exported to the cytoplasm via nuclear pores.
Animation 4.12: Nucleus
Source and Credit: gifsoup
Animation 4.13: Nucleus
Source and Credit: ibiblio304. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Chromosomes
Nucleus is often deeply stained with basic dyes because of the chr omatin material. During cell 
division chromatin material is converted into darkly stained thread like structures known are 
chromosomes. Under a compound microscope, chromosomes appear to be mad e of arms and 
centromeres. Centromere is the place on the chromosome where spindle ibres are attached during 
cell division. Each chromosome consists of two identical chromatids  at the beginning of cell division 
(chromatid is exact replica of the chromosome) which are held together  at centromere (Fig.4.15).
A chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins. All the information nec essary to control the 
activities of the cell is located on the chromosomes in the form of genes, which are transferred 
from one generation to the other. The number of chromosomes in all indivi duals of the same 
species remains constant generation after generation. In man, each c ell contains 46 chromosomes, 
frog cell has 26 and chimpanzee has 48 chromosomes. There are 8 chromosoms in the fruit ly, 
Drosophila melanogaster , 16  chromosomes in onion, 48 in potato, and 14 in garden pea.  The number 
of chromosomes in normal body cells is diploid (2n), whereas h aploid chromosome number (n) 
is present in germ cells, e.g human sperms and eggs have 23, while those of Drosophila  have 4 
chromosomes.
Fig.4.15. : Structure of chromosome and its shape.314. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                    
 Fig. 4.16 Structure of nucleus
PROKARYOTIC AND EUKARYOTIC CELL
Biologists have divided cells into two types: prokaryotic and eukaryoti c. The diferences between 
these two types of cells are mainly based upon the structure of their n uclei. Eukaryotes have a 
very well deined nucleus, in which nuclear material (chromosomes  or DNA) is enclosed in double 
nuclear membrane. In prokaryotic cells, however the genetic material (DNA) is without any nuclear 
membrane covering and is directly submerged in the cytoplasm. Or ganisms possessing prokaryotic 
cells are called Prokaryotes and those possessing eukaryotic cells are called Eukaryotes. Prokaryotes
include bacteria and blue green algae. Eukaryotes include all other unicellular or multicellular 
organisms such as animals, plants, fungi and protista.
Diagrams of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are given in Fig  4.2, 4.3, and 4.17. Prokaryotic cells 
generally lack many of the membrane bounded structures found in eukaryotic cells. For example, 
mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, chloroplasts and Golgi app aratus are absent in prokaryotic324. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1cells. Since there is no nuclear membrane, a prokaryotic cell ha s no distinct nucleus and its DNA  
molecule is directly suspended in cytoplasm. Prokaryotes have smal l sized ribosomes 70S compared 
to eukaryotes 80S. In prokaryotes mitosis is missing and the cell divides by binary ission. Because 
of their simpler structure, it was widely accepted for a long time that prokaryotic cells represent a
more primitive stage of evolution than eukaryotic cells. Perhaps the most distinctive feature of 
the prokaryotic cell is its cell wall, composed of polysaccharid e chains bound covalently to shorter 
chains of amino acids forming peptidoglycan or murein. The en tire cell wall is often regarded as a 
single huge molecule or molecular complex called sacculus The c ell wall of plants is generally made 
up of cellulose and is diferently structured than that of a bacteri um.
Fig. 4-17. Generalized Prokaryotic cell.334. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 4.14: Prokaryote vs. Eukaryote
Source and Credit: Ameoba sisters344. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
Q.1.     Fill in the blanks:
            (i)       In eukaryotic cell chromatin material  is bounded b y --------------
            (ii)      A group of ribosomes attached to mRNA i s known as —------------
            (iii)     -------------- is the place on ch romosomes where spindle ibres are attached 
                      during cell division.
            (iv)     The endoplasmic reticulum with attached ribosomes is known as ------------
            (v)      The soluble part of the cytoplasm is cal led.
Q.2.     Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘f alse’ and write the correct statement if it         
             is false.
            (i)       Cell membrane is present in all euka ryotic cells.
            (ii)      Chloroplast and mitochondria do not ha ve hereditary material.
            (iii)     Centriole is involved in cell secretions.
            (iv)     Sometimes many ribosomes get attached to the sa me stretch of mRNA forming a  
                      structure called the cytosome.
            (v)      Mitochondria are very important organelles of the eukaryotic cells.
Q.3.     Short Questions.
            i.        Describe various movements involved in the tra nsport of materials across the cell 
                      membrane.
            ii.       State various structural modiications i n a cell involved in secretions.
            iii.      List the processes blocked by mitochondr ial failure in a cell.
            iv.      What will happen if a chromosome loses its centromere?
            V.      How does autophagy help in converting a ta dpole larva into an adult amphibian?
            vi.      Is there any similarity between bacterial  and plant cell wall?                                                               
                                                                 Exercise354. The Cell eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1         
Q.4.         Extensive Questions.
                (i)          Compare structure and functi on of chloroplasts and mitochondria.
                (ii)         State ‘Cell Theory’ and disc uss its emergence.
                (iii)        Write notes on :
                             (a)         Cytoskeleton                              (b)        Peroxisomes & Glyoxys omes
                (v)         What might happen if some lys osomal enzymes are absent?
                             Explain with examples.