CHAPTER
10Kingdom Animalia
Animation 10.1: Growth and development
Source & Credit: Wikispaces210. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
INTRODUCTION
Animalia kingdom includes all the animals. The name anima lia is derived from Latin, anima = breath 
or soul.
In traditional two-kingdom systems, the multicellular animals were referred to broadly as Metazoa 
to distinguish them from one-celled animals, the Protozoa. In this tex t book we have followed the 
ive kingdom classiication system introduced by Robert Whittaker. In  this system of classiication 
the traditional Protozoa belong to kingdom Protoctista. Kingdom Animali a consists of all animals 
which are multicellular, diploid eukaryotic, ingestive heterotrophs and develop from two dissimilar 
haploid gametes, a large egg and a smaller sperm. In this c hapter we will discuss various groups 
and subgroups with details of the phyla in your curriculu m.
Virtually all biologists agree that animals evolved from protoctists;  however, which protoctists, 
when, and in what sort of environments, are questions that are still actively debated.
               Table 10.1 The relationship of diferen t phyla discussed in this chapter.310. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1    
DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLEXITY IN ANIMALS
Although multicellularity is found in all the kingdoms, Fu ngi, Plantae and Animalia but it has 
developed most impressively in animals- their cells are joined by c omplex junctions, this ensures 
control of communications and low of materials between cells. The an imals are a diverse group 
distinct in their form. The smallest are microscopic, which ar e smaller than many protoctists and 
the largest today are whalessea mammals, included in phylum Chordata.
The simplest of the animals belong to subkingdom Parazoa  (phylum Porifera). These animals lack 
tissues organised into organs and have indeterminate shape, and a re asymmetrical. The sub kingdom 
Eumetazoa  includes animals of other phyla. These animals have tissues organised into organs 
and organ systems. These include radially symmetrical anim als (grade Radiata ) and bilaterally 
symmetrical animals (grade Bilateria ). Grade Radiata includes simplest of the Eumetazoa (phylum 
Cnidaria ). They are much simpler in their organisation compared to the an imals belonging to other 
Eumetazoa. Most of the phyla which belong to kingdom Animalia  (about 29) belong to subkingdom 
Eumetazoa. These animals have been divided into three groups on the bas is of presence, absence 
or type of body cavity found in them. The animals which do not h ave a body cavity have been 
grouped under Acoelomata . The animals which have a false coelom, the pseudocoele , have been 
grouped under Pseudocoelomata . The animals which have a true coelom have been grouped 
under Coelomata .
GRADE RADIATA
In this group animals with radial symmetry have been included . All the animals which are included 
here are also diploblastic. This is a condition or organization in which the parts of the body are 
arranged around a central axis in such a way that any pla ne passing through the central axis divides 
the animal in halves that are almost mirror image of each other e.g.  as in cnidaria (coelenterata). 
The cylindrical body of a sea-anemone can be cut in two equal h alves vertically in any plane.410. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
GRADE BILATERIA
This group includes animals with bilateral symmetry. In an  animal where the right side is 
approximately the same as the left side and where there is a disti nct anterior end is said to have 
bilateral symmetry. The animal can be divided into two equal pa rts by an imaginary line only in one 
plane. In most multicellular animals  there is a clearly dif erentiated head present at the anterior end 
and a distinct posterior end. Also there are clearly deined dorsal and ventral surfaces. The animals 
belonging to phyla, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Mollusc a, Arthropoda, Echinodermata, 
Hemichordata and Chordata are included in this grade. It mus t be mentioned here that the animals 
belonging to phylum echinodermata, have developed bilateral symmetry,  as is evident, from the 
study of structure of their larvae. However, the adult Echinoderms, ha ve secondarily developed 
radial symmetry, due to their special mode of life. All the anim als included in grade Bilateria are 
triploblastic. These may be acoelomate, pseudocoelomate or coelomate.
Fig. 10.1 (a) Radial (b) Bilateral symmetry510. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Series Proterostomia (Protostomes) Series Deuterostom ia: (Deuterostomes)
1.         Cleavage or division of the
            zygote is spiral and determinate.
2.        During development process the mouth 
           in these animals arises  from the 
           blastopore or from its anterior margin.
3.        Coelom or body cavity is formed due to        
           splitting of mesoderm (schizocoelous).
4.        Mesoderm is derived from cells on 
           anterior lip of blastopore.
5.        This series proterostomia includes
           animals belonging to phyla
           aschelminthes (nematoda) 
           annelida, mollusca and arthropoda1.        Cleavage is radial and indeterminate.
2.        During embryonic developmentmouth 
           is formed at some distance anterior to 
           the blastopore and blastopore forms the 
           anus.
 
3.        Coelom is developed as an outpouching    
           of archenterons (enterocoelous).
4.        Mesoderm is derived from wall of 
           developing gut (archenteron).
5.        This series includes animals belonging to               
           phyla echinodermata, hemichordata and  
           chordata.610. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 10.2 Patterns of embryonic development of coelom and of egg c leavage In protostomes and deuterostomes.
A spiral and determinate  cleavage is that in which the lines or planes of cleavage are not symmetrical 
between poles instead these are diagonal to the polar axis and produc e unequal cells around the 
axis of polarity and all the blastomeres have determined role to play  in the formations of embryo. 
The fate of each blastomere is foretold.
In radial and indeterminate  cleavage the planes of cleavage are symmetrical to the polar axis an d 
produce tiers of cells on top of each other and the fate of each blastom ere is not pre-determined. 
In some anyone blastomere can produce a complete embryo.710. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1DIPLOBLASTIC AND TRIPLOBLASTIC ORGANISATION
Diploblastic animals belong to division radiata. The body of these animals consists of two layers 
of cells, ectoderm and endoderm. There is a jelly like mesenchyme or mesogloea which in most 
cases is non cellular. Diploblastic animals show lesser degree of specialisation and they do not 
form specialised organs. There is no special transport system in these animals. Most substances 
are distributed within their body by process of difusion. There i s no central nervous system in 
these animals. A neuron net is present. These animals have radia l symmetry. There is only one 
cavity in the body called gastrovascular cavity which has only  mouth which serves for the entry 
of food and water and also for the removal of wastes along with water . This is known as sac like 
digestive system. Diploblastic animals are included in phylum Cnidaria (coelenterate) which would 
be discussed in detail later in the chapter.
Triploblastic animals are included in phyla which have b een placed in grade bilateria/ The body of 
these animals is made from three layers ectoderm, mesoderm and endoder m. After embryonic 
development these layers in most triploblastic animals are not disti nct as separate layers of cells, 
but are represented by the structures formed from them. The cells of these animals show greater 
degree of specialisation. These have specialised organs and organ s systems. Special transport 
systems i.e. blood vascular system is present in most of the cases . The systems such as integumentary 
and nervous develop from ectoderm. Mesodem gives rise to muscular, skel etal and reproductive 
systems. Endoderm forms the lining of digestive tract and glands of digestive system, such as liver. 
The digestive system is of tube type i.e. having mouth at the anterior en d and the anus at the 
posterior end. Triploblastic animals may be acoelomate, pseudocoelom ate or coelomate.
Acoelomates, Pseudocoelomates and Coelomates
The following account would help to explain the above mentioned terms.
Acoelomates
In phylum Platyhelminthes there is no body cavity or coelom, and the mesoderm forms a loose, 
cellular tissue called mesenchyma or parenchyma which ills the space between the ectoderm and 
endoderm. It forms a packing around the internal organs of the a nimals to support and protect 
them. Such animals are called acoelomates (Fig. 10.3). In ac oelomates the gut is sac-type and there 
is no special transport system. Only excretory system is developed for  the transport of excretory 
products. This system consists of lame cells, excretory ducts and  excretory pores. However the 
nervous system is well developed.810. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Pseudocoelomates
In Aschelminthes the space between the body wall and the digestive tu be is called pseudocoelom 
(false body cavity). Pseudocoelom is not homologous to true coelom because:  it is not lined by 
coelomic epithelium. It has no relation with the reproductive and excr etory organs. It develops 
from the blastocoel of the embryo and it is bounded externally by the muscles and internally by the 
cuticle of the intestine. The animals having pseudocoelom are call ed pseudocoelomates
Coelomates
Coelom is cavity present between the body wall and the alimentary canal and is lined by mesoderm. 
The mesoderm splits into outer parietal layer which under lines th e body wall and the visceral 
layer which covers the alimentary canal and the cavity between them i s the true coelom. It is illed 
with luid called coelomic luid.  The animals which possess coelom or true body cavity are called  
coelomates e.g. animals from annelids to chordates.
In coelomates gut attains more complexity and neuro-sensory system is well developed along with 
excretory system, circulatory system, respiratory and reproductive sy stems.
Fig. 10.3 General body plan of acoefomate, pseudocoelomate and  coelomate.
PARAZOA
Phylum: Porifera the most primitive animals
The name porifera is derived from Latin porus  = pore, ferra  = to bear910. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The Porifera are pore-bearing animals, commonly called the s ponges. All are aquatic. Out of total 
5000 species 150 species live in fresh water while all others a re marine.
General Characteristics
These animals are composed of many cells however there is no tissue or ganization and have 
no organs. Sponges lack symmetry. In most sponges the body wall is formed of an outer layer, 
pinacoderm, made up of cells called pinacocytes: and an  inn er layer choanoderm made of lagellated 
collar cells called choanocytes. Between these two 
layers is present gelatinous mesenchyme which may 
contain amoeboid cells and spicules or sponging ibres.
The poriferans range in size from few millimeter wide to more than one metre tall. They are 
macroscopic i.e., can be seen with naked eye. There is a sing le cavity inside the body, the spongocoel . 
In most sponges the spongocoel may be divided into lagellated chambers  or canals, lined by 
lagellated choanocytes.
Numerous pores are present in the body wall. The pores through whi ch water enters the body are 
called ostia , and pore by which the water leaves the body is known as osculum  (main opening). 
There are no respiratory or circulatory organs.
Since the sponges are sessile, therefore these depend upon the food comin g to them along with 
water currents brought about by movement of lagella of choanocytes. Thi s includes small animals, 
(zooplankton) and plants, (phytoplankton) which constitute about 20 % of their food. 80% of their 
food consists of detrital organic particles. The food enters the spongoc oel cavity through Ostia. The 
food is ingested by the lagellated cells, the choanocytes . The waste products either difuse out of 
the sponge directly through the body wall or low out through osculum.
The adult sponges are stationary, spending their lives attached to th e rocks at the bottom or other 
solid objects. However, their larvae are able to move (swim).
There is no deinite nervous system, however neurosensory and neuron cells  are probably present 
which seem to coordinate the low of water.
The skeleton is in the form of variously shaped needle-like structures  called spicules. These may be 
calcareous or siliceous. The bath sponge has a skeleton of spongin  ibres. The skeleton is present 
among pinacocytes and provides support. Spicules are also presen t around osculum and ostia.Scolymastra joubini- a barrel like glass sponge of 
Antarctica is more than a metre tall.1010. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Sponges reproduce both by asexual and sexual methods of reproduc tion.
The asexual reproduction  in sponges is by budding . The buds may be external or internal, The 
internal buds are called gemmuies . Both types of buds develop into new sponges.
Some sponge species reproduce sexually. 
These are mostly hermaphrodite , 
mostly protandrous , i.e. male sex cells 
develop irst. In some sponges the sexes 
are separate. Sperms released in water 
are carried to the eggs by amoeboid 
cells. Fertilization occurs in mesenchyme 
and zygote is formed. The embryo 
development includes blastula and larval 
stages.
Examples of sponges are :
i.   Sycon:                    It is a typical marine sponge.
ii.  Leucoselenia:        A sponge that consists of group of erect tubes.
iii. Euplectella:              It is beautiful and delicate sponge made up of  glassy framework. It is commonly  
                                    called Venus lower basket.
iv. Spongilla:              It is freshwater sponge.
Importance
The skeleton of sponges have long been used by man mostly for washin g and bathing. Although 
many artiicial sponges have been made from synthetic material, sti ll the natural sponges are in 
demand and is an important industry in many parts of the worl d. The best commercial sponges 
are found in the warm waters of Mediterranean Sea. Sponges have gr eat capacity to absorb water. 
They are used in surgical operations for absorbing luids and  blood. They are also used for sound 
absorption in buildings.
GRADE RADIATA
Phylum Coelenterata / Cnidaria - Diploblastic Animals1110. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The name Cnidaria has been given to this group of animals due to the presence of special cells 
called cnidocytes . These cells give rise to nematocysts -the stinging cells, characteristic of this 
group.
Cnidarians have double layer organization and are therefore dipl oblastic having tissue grade 
organization and have organs. During the development two germinal layers are formed the outer 
ectoderm and inner endoderm from which their bodies are constructed.  The ectoderm forms outer 
covering and some cells of this layer in most animals give rise to nematocysts while the endoderm 
cells become specialized for digestion of food. Between the two layers is  a jelly-like mesoglea. In 
these animals there is only one cavity which serves as digestive as well as body cavity which is called
gastrovascular cavity or enteron  and opens to the outside by only one opening the mouth. So 
the animals of this group have sac like digestive cavity.
In coelenterates the arrangement of body parts is in relation to centra lized axis (symmetrical). An 
object is symmetrical where there is a correspondence in form and arrangement of parts so that 
a plane passing through the center divides it into similar hal ves. The coelenterates have radial 
symmetry and are aquatic, found both in marine and freshwater  habitats.
The coelenterates range in size from microscopic Hydra  to macroscopic, Branchioceranthus, a 
hydrozoan polyp that may reach two metres in length. Cnidarians are found in two basic forms 
the polyps  and the medusae . Polyps are cylindrical animals, which in most cases ar e nutritive in 
function, hence named as gastrozoids . The medusae are umbrella like in form. These are free 
swimming. The medusae are involved in sexual reproduction as they have gonads.
The mouth is surrounded by a series of tentacles. These bear sting ing cells or nematocysts, which 
are organs of defense and ofense.
The coelentrates are carnivores and feed upon small organisms whi ch come into contact with 
them. These organisms are immobilized by nematocysts and taken into the digestive cavity as food 
where it is digested and then distributed by difusion.
The nervous system is in the form of a network of neuron cells formi ng an irregular net or plexus 
in the body-wall. There is no central nervous system.
Many colonial coelenterates such as corals produce a hard exosk eleton formed of calcium carbonate1210. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(CaC03). It is secreted by epidermal cells that take lime from sea water.  The skeleton of coral is 
responsible for formation of small coral islands or large cora l reefs.
  
Most species are sessile, for example Hydra, Obelia, sea-anemone and corals, while other are free 
living and motile e.g. jelly ishes etc. Many live as solitary in dividuals e.g. Hryda  jelly ishes and sea-
anemones and quite a large number are colonial e.g. physalia, vellela etc. A colony is an aggregation 
of individuals or zooids that perform diferent functions for the colon y.
In Coelenterates reproduction takes place by asexual as well as sex ual means e.g. Hydra  reproduces 
asexually by the formation of buds on its surface. The bud after  some time separate from the 
parent and develops into a new individual. In Obelia  for example there is asexual as well as sexual 
reproduction. It has a kind of zooid known as blastostyle which gives rise to individual zooids called 
medusae by asexual method. The medusae when released in water d evelop reproductive organs 
which produce gametes that unite to form zygote from which Obelia  colony is again formed.
The life cycle of coelenterates is characterized by the presence 
of alternation of generations. There are two generations, one 
reproduces by sexual means and the other by asexual means. 
Both generations are diploid. Often the two generations consist 
of one free-living and one attached stage. Therefore asexual 
generation and sexual generation alternate with one another. 
This is known as alternation of generations e.g., Obelia .
Polymorphism - A Characteristic Feature of Coelenterate s (Cnidaria)
The occurrence of structurally and functionally more than two dif erent types of individuals, called 
the zooids within the same organism is called polymorphism . 
For example, in Obelia  there are feeding individuals, the gastrozooids; the individuals  capable of 
asexual reproduction only, the gonozooids, blastostyles and free-livi ng or sexually reproducing 
individuals, the medusae..
The common examples ofcoelenterates are:
i.  Hydra  : A freshwater - coelenterate. It exists only in polyp form, theref ore
    alternation of generations is absent.Some of colonial members 
have upto ive diferent types 
of zooids, performing diferent 
functions for the colony e.g. 
Physalia (portuguese man of 
war).1310. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
ii. Obelia  : A marine colonial that exhibits alternation of generations.
iii. Aurelia  (jelly ish) : The polyp is 
reduced and medusa is dominant in 
jellyish.
iv. Actinia  (sea anemone) : The body  
     consists of polyp only, enteron is 
     divided by large partitions 
     called mesenteries.
v. Madrepora  : The body is covered with 
    hard calcareous skeleton formed of 
    calcium carbonate. They are commonly  
    called corals . The skeleton forms large 
    coral reefs and even small islands.
                                                                                              Fig. 10.5  Coelenterates (Cnidarians)1410. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Coral reefs
Corals are formed from the secretions produced by specialized poly ps that are present in certain 
coelenterates. These polyps become covered by stony cups due to hardening  of their secretions. 
From the mouth of the stony cup a polyp can pass out its tentacle for the purpose of feeding 
and withdraw itself where not feeding. Most such Coelenterates are col onial. The stony net-work 
or mass of such Coelenterates are called Corals. Living polyps ar e found on the surface layer of 
corals whereas underneath the mass are dead stony 
structures only and there are no polyps inside. The 
stony masses that are formed in this way are called 
coral reefs.  These are mostly formed of calcium
carbonates (lime-stone).
Coral reefs are found in the coastal waters of Florida, West Indies , East Coast of Africa, Australia 
and Island of Coral Sea.
GRADE - BILATERIA
Triploblastic animals -The Acoelomates
Phylum: Platyhelminthes -The Flatworms
General Characteristics
The name Platyhelminthes means “latworms”. The body of these anima ls is soft and dorsoventrally 
compressed. 
The Platyhelminthes are triploblastic acoelomates. There is devel opment of a third layer, the 
mesoderm, which separates the ectoderm and endoderm. The Platyhelmin thes exhibit bilateral 
symmetry, and body is unsegmented.
With few exceptions the Platyhelminthes are parasites, mostly endopar asites, i.e., live inside their 
hosts. The most common examples are Taenia solium (tapeworm), Fasciola hepatica  (liver luke) 
and Schistosoma  (blood luke). The parasites are more common in tropics. Some of thes e cause 
diseases in humans. A few species are free living and found i n freshwater, for example Dugesia  
(planaria).The corals because of their massive structure serve as 
living place for a variety of sea life.1510. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Their size ranges from few millmeters (10 mm in case of Plana ria) to several meters (tapeworm).
Much of the body space is taken up by a branching sac type digestive system. The digestive system 
is poorly developed in some species or may be absent as in the tap e-worms.
The excretory system consists of branching tubes ending in bulb -like cells, the lame cells.
A well developed nervous system is present in Platyhelminthes. It is in the form of either a simple 
network of nerves or ganglia. The sense organs are present at the anteri or end. Respiratory and 
circulatory systems are absent.
The parasitic species absorb nutrients from the hosts. The free- living species (Planaria) feed on 
small animals and bodies of dead and decaying animals.
The free-living forms are motile. They move by cilia present on their undersides (Planaria). In 
parasitic forms the movement is restricted.
The Platyhelminthes reproduce both by sexual and asexual means of  reproduction. Asexual 
reproduction is by ission in which the animal constricts in th e middle into two pieces, each of 
which regenerates the missing part. The sexually reproducing s pecies are hermaphrodite , i.e., both 
male and female reproductive organs are present in the same individu al. Larval form is sometimes 
present. 
The common examples of latworms are:
(i) Dugesia  (Planaria)  : A free-living latworms with a ciliated outer surface.
(ii) Fasciola  (Liver luke)  : It is an endoparasite in sheep and occasionally in human beings. It has 
suckers used for attachment to host tissue. It completes its life cycle in two hosts, a snail, sheep or 
man. It lives in the bile duct of its hosts.
(iii) Taenia  (Tape worm)  : An endoparasite of humans, cattle and pig, that completes its life cycle in
two hosts. The intermediate host is pig or cattle. The body is ribb on-like and divided into segments 
called proglottids which contain mainly sex organs. The segments  continue to break of and are 
passed out from the intestine along with faeces.1610. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
Adaptations for parasitic mode of life
The parasitic Platyhelminthes have completely adapted themselves to par asitic mode of life by the 
development of the following characteristics:
1. The epidermis is absent and there is the formation of resistan t cuticle for protection. 
2. They have developed adhesive organs, such as suckers and hook s, for attachment to the host.
3. There is degeneration of muscular system and nervous system.
4. The digestive system has become simpliied due to increased dependen ce on host.
5. The reproductive systems are complicated and the ova are produc ed in huge numbers to ensure  
     continuity of the species.
6. The complexity of life cycle and presence of more than one host d uring the life cycle is also an  
     important parasitic adaptation.
Fig. 10.6 Example of animals of platyhelminthes.1710. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Infestation
In Taenia (tape worm), the development of the zygote begins while it i s still inside the uterus of 
female. The last segments or proglottids and their uteri contain c ompletely developed embryo. The 
fully mature proglottids break of from the body and pass out of the body of man along with faeces 
(undigested waste). The embryo inside the egg is round in shape and has six chitinous hooks. 
It shows limited movement of contraction. In order to develop further it mu st reach a second 
host which may be a cow. The parasite remains embedded in the vol untary muscles of cow. If 
an improperly cooked beef is eaten by a person, the parasite whic h has not been killed begins to 
develop further in the intestine of man.
Disinfestation
Once the parasite has entered the intestine of man it is diicult to remove it completely. In this 
respect care should be taken to cook beef properly before eating it. So th at there is no chance of 
the parasite entering the digestive system but if it has entered then certa in medicines are taken 
to remove it. Its complete removal is necessary because if only head rema ins inside the intestine 
it can grow into new tape-worm once again. Besides treatment with dru gs, physicians also give 
anema to the patient, to fully remove the parasite.
Triploblastic Animals - Pseudocoelomates
Aschelminthes (Phylum Nematoda) - The Round worms
General Characteristics
The name Nematoda means “pointed ends”. The animals included in  this group nave elongated 
worm like body with pointed ends. The nematodes are triploblastic a nd pseudocoelomates. One 
end of the body is anterior, however the head is not clearly marked and there are no special sense 
organs at this end. The nematodes exhibit bilateral symmetry and the body is unsegmented. The 
body cavity is pseudocoelom . It is derived from the hollow space, the blastocoel , situated in the 
blastula , an early stage in embryological development, and not from the mesoder m. It consists of a 
number of vacuolated cells illed with a protein-rich luid which  develops high hydrostatic pressure.
The nematodes range from small microscopic forms, to some form r eaching a length of upto one 
metre. The digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal with  two openings. The opening at 
the anterior end is mouth and at the posterior end is the anus. In p arasitic nematodes the digestive 
system is simple. A luid illed space is present between the body w all and alimentary canal. It 
provides “tube within tube” type structure in nematodes. The excretory sy stem consists of1810. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1two longitudinally running excretory canals which unite at the anterior end to form a single canal 
that opens to the exterior through an excretory pore on the ventral surface. There is a nerve ring 
around the pharynx, which give rise to dorsal, ventral and latera l nerve cords running throughout 
the length of the worms. The sense organs are in the form of sensory papillae  present on the lips 
at the anterior end. The circulatory and respiratory systems are a bsent. The gaseous exchange 
takes place through general body surface. Locomotion is by undula ting waves of contraction and 
relaxation of muscles. These muscles are arranged in four ba nds, two dorso-lateral and two ventro-
lateral. The circular muscles are absent, therefore the bending  is dorso-ventral only.
The sexes are separate. The female gonads are ovaries and these produc e eggs. These male gonads 
are testes which produce sperms. A larval stage is present in the life cycle.
Importance - Parasitic Diseases
Aschelminthes is important from the point of view of its parasites of which it has a great variety 
qausing some very serious diseases in man and plants. 
Ascaris  lumbricoides is an intestinal parasite of man. 
The genus Rhabditis  contains numerous species normally found in soil, organic m atter or water and 
feces of man or animals. Enterobius vermicularis  commonly known as pin worm is cosmopolitan but 
more common in Europe and America. Pinworms are 
parasites in the human caecum, colon and appendix. 
Their movement causes intense itching of anus, 
inlammation of mucous membrane of colon and 
appendix resulting in insomnia and loss of appetite.
Ancylostoma duodenale is commonly known as hook worm. It is a parasite of human sma ll intestine 
in Asia, North Africa and Europe. It is very dangerous becaus e it holds the villi of intestine and sucks 
blood and body luid. During feeding they produce an anticoagula nt to prevent clotting of blood 
and after feeding leave the wound bleeding. In children it ca n cause severe anemia and retard 
physical and mental growth.Round worms are everywhere outdoors, where they play 
an important role in breaking down organic matter. A 
single rotting apple may contain 90,000 worms. Billions 
thrive in each acre of topsoil.1910. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Triploblastic Animals - Coelomates
Phylum Annelida The Segmented Worms
General Characteristics
Most of the worms with which we are familiar are included in this phylum. They are segmented and 
commonly called annelids, (from the Latin word for “ little ring ”) 
The body is metamerically segmented. The body becomes divided tran sversely into a number of 
similar parts or segments. The subdivisions may be indicated externally by constrictions of the 
body surface. Internally, the segments are separated from each oth er by septa extending across 
the coelom. However, the various systems of body such as gut, blood vess els, and nerve cord are 
continuous throughout the length of body penetrating each individual s egment.
The animals are triploblastic and coelomate, showing bilateral s ymmetry. The annelids include 
worms, which may be marine ( Nereis ), freshwater ( stylaria ) or found in damp soil ( earthworms ). 
Some are parasites, for example, Hirudo  - (leech).
The annelids show specialization of body structures. The organ s ystems are well developed.
Digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal which is divi ded into distinct parts, each 
performing a speciic function. It has two openings, the mouth at th e anterior end, and the anus 
at the posterior end. The mouth is overhung by a lobed structure, the prostomium . In parasitic 
species, the digestive system is poorly developed.
Annelids have true coelom i.e. the mesoderm splits into parietal lay er which lines the body wall, 
and the visceral layer which covers the alimentary canal, the spa ce between the two layers of 
mesoderm, is the coelom, and is illed in by coelomic luid, whic h serves- as hydrostatic skeleton 
also.
Excretion takes place by specialized structures called nephridia . These are ciliated organs present 
in each segment in the body cavity.2010. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1A well developed central nervous system is present in annelids. It comprises of a simple brain and 
a solid double, longitudinal, ventral nerve cord. Nerves arise in each segment from the nerve cord.
Annelids are the irst group of invertebrates which have developed a clos ed circulatory system 
- a system in which a circulatory luid called blood lows in  a network of vessels known as blood 
vessels. It transports gases and nutrients.
The respiratory system is absent. The exchange of gases is by di fusion through the skin in to blood 
capillaries. The skin is kept moist by ,mucus, and coelomic luid. 
The body wall contains muscles which help in locomotion. The m uscles are of two types:
a.   Circular Muscles : These are arranged along the circumference of the body.
b.   Longitudinal Muscles :  These are arranged along the length of the body.2110. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The locomotion is brought about by the interaction of muscles and hy drostatic skeleton. Contraction 
of circular muscle produces a pressure in the coelomic luid tha t forces the body to elongate. 
Similarly contraction of longitudinal muscles produce a pressu re in the coelomic luid that would 
cause the body to widen. The organs of locomotion in annelids are chitinous chaetae or setae 
embedded in sacs (earthworm) or on . parapodia present in the body  wall (e.g., Nereis ). Chaetae 
are absent in leech.
The common mode of reproduction is sexual. Most annelids (Earthworm , leech) are hermaphrodite. 
In some annelids (e.g., Nereis ) the sexes are separate, the fertilization is external and a free s wimming 
trochophore larva  is produced 
during the life cycle.
Burrowing activity of earthworms 
permits greater penetration of 
air into the soil, and improves 
drainage capacity of the soil. 
It also enables roots to grow 
downwards through the soil 
more easily. Mixing and churning 
of the soil is brought about when 
earth which contains inorganic 
particles is brought up to the 
surface from lower regions. 
Earthworm is perhaps most active 
segmented worm in churning the 
soil, therefore it is commonly 
termed as natural plough.
Phylum Annelida comprises :
1. Class Polychaeta
2. Class Oligochaeta 3. Class Hirudinea
Class Polychaeta
These have a distinct head region with eyes and structure known as  palps  and  tentacles . Sexes are 
usually separate. The organs of locomotion are parapodia. They ar e mostly aquatic (marine). During 
development these give rise to a trochophore larva. Important examples are  Nereis, Chaetopterus .2210. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Class Oligochaeta
These animals have internal and external segmentation. Organs of l ocomotion are setae . Head 
region not prominent or distinct. They are hermaphrodite (bisexua l). No larva formed during 
development e.g. Lumbricus terrestris , Pheretima posthuma  and other earthworms. They may be 
terrestrial or aquatic.
Class Hirudinea
They have body with ixed number of segments. Each segment has add itional circular rings or 
markings called annuli. They do not have organs of locomotion and  move due to the contraction 
of their body and with tne nelp of suckers. Mostly hermaphrodite an d trochophore larva is formed 
during development. They are aquatic. No distinct head is present but leeches have chitinous jaws 
for making a puncture in the skin of the host. They also have an anticoagulant secretion which 
is passed into the wound to allow smooth low of blood into its digestive s ystem where it can be 
stored for a long time e.g. Hirudo medicinalis  (medicinal leech).
Phylum : Arthropods - Animals with Jointed Legs
General Characteristics
The phylum contains more species than any other phylum. They ar e commonly called Arthropods 
(arthron = joint + pods = feet). Insects (cockroaches, grasshopper s, butterlies, mosquitoes) are 
most commoh arthropods on the earth.
The body is segmented. Each segment is attached to its neighbour by means of a modiied portion 
of cuticle which is thin and lexible. They possess jointed appen dages. These appendages have 
been modiied for specialized functions.
These are believed to have common origin with annelids because both have some common 
characteristics such as segmented body, appendages and cutic le.
Arthropods have exploited every type of habitat on land and in water. The aquatic species include 
both freshwater and marine. Many of these can ly, therefore visit ai r periodically.2310. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Arthropods are variable structurally. Some are worm-like centipedes while the others are lying 
insects with the body divided into distinct regions, the head, thor ax and abdomen. The body is 
covered with waterproof chitinous cuticle secreted by the epidermis. 
The coelom is not present as the main body cavity. Instead a haemocoel has developed. It is reduced 
coelom and communicates with blood vascular system.
The digestive system is in the form of alimentary canal with two openings, the mouth and anus. It is 
divided into diferent parts each performing a speciic function. T he food comprises of small plants 
and animals.
A well developed excretory system comprising of Malpighian tubules  is present in arthropods. The 
nitrogenous wastes are excreted in the form of solid uric acid. 
A highly deyeloped nervous system is present. It consists of paired  ganglia (simple brain) connected 
to a ventral double nerve cord. A ganglion is present in each  segmen t. Nerves arise from these 
ganglia. The sensory organs are usually a pair of compound eyes and antennae etc.
Most arthropods possess an extensive tracheal system formed of air tub es called tracheae for 
the exchange of gases. Main tubes open to the exterior through pair ed openings, called spiracles. 
Aquatic art hropods respire through gills and book lungs.
The blood circulatory system in arthropods is unique. It is open circulatory system. The blood lows 
in the body cavity bathing the tissues of the body. However, there is  a primitive heart and a main 
blood vessel situated dorsaliy. Blood is colourless as it is without haemoglobin.
The skeleton is external, i.e., exoskeleton. It is in the form of an outer covering, the cuticle which 
is light in weight; and is formed chiely of chitin. It provides  surface for the attachment of muscles 
which help in locomotion.
The arthropods exhibit active and swift movements. They swim, crawl  or ly depending upon the 
habitat they occupy. The organs of locomotion are paired appendages  and in some cases paired 
wings also.2410. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Reproduction and Life History
The sexes are separate. The testes and ovaries, produce sperm’s, and eggs respectively.
Metamorphosis
Life history of insects is characterized by metamorphosis (meta = change + morphe = form). This is 
an abrupt change of form or structure during the life cycle. T here are three morphologically distinct 
stages in the life cycle, the egg “ inally “ develops into larva which is converted into motionless pupa 
that inally develops into an adult. In some primitive insects the metam orphosis is incomplete. The 
larva resembles adult and is called nymph or instar. It lives  in the same habitat as adult. 
Classiication
Phylum Arthropoda is a large group consisting of great variety a mong them. Some of its important 
classes are as follows.
1. Class Crustacea :  These arthropods are aquatic and have gills for respiration. On  the dorsal 
side of the cephalothorax the exoskeleton is in the fofm of carapace. In the exoskeleton deposition 
of salts in addition to chitin makes 
it more irm. The appendages 
are modiied for capturing food, 
walking, swimming, respiration 
and reproduction. Coelom is 
reduced and is in the form of 
hemocoel. Head has two pairs of 
antennal appendages, one pair 
of mandibles (jaws) and two pairs 
of maxillae. Sexes are mostly 
separate e.g. Daphnia, Cyclops , 
Crabs, lobsters, prawn, wood louse 
etc. (Fig. 10.8)2510. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.12. Class Insecta :  This is the largest group 
not only of Arthropoda but of all the animal 
kingdom and has great variety. Insects are 
found everywhere, many show social behaviour. 
The body in, insects has three distinct regions 
head, thorax and abdomen. There are a pair of 
antennae and compound eyes on the head. The 
head is usually vertical to the body and jaws are 
ventrally placed. The thorax has three segments 
in which are present three pairs of jointed legs 
and in many one or two pairs of wings. Abdomen 
has varying number of segments. Brain is formed 
of fused ganglia and double nerve cord is ventral. 
Sexes are separate and animals are oviparous. 
Metamorphosis takes place during development 
e.g. dragonly mosquito, butterlies, moths, 
wasps, and beetles etc. (Fig. 10.9).                                                             Fig. 10.9 Insects
                                                                                                                        
3. Class Arachnida :  Body has the anterior segments that are fused to form a combined 
cephalothorax, with a pair of appendages called chelicerae wi th claws, two pairs as pedipalps 
and four pairs of legs. There are no antennae and no true jaws. Abdomen may be segmented 
or unsegmented with or without appendages. Respiration is by 
gills or special structures called book lungs, excretion is by the 
Malpighian tubules. Eyes simple, sexes are separate. They are 
oviparous (lay eggs). No true metamorphosis e.g. scorpions, 
spiders, mites and ticks.Most spiders have eight eyes placed in such 
a way as to give them panoramic view of 
the predators and prey.2610. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
  Fig. 10.10 Arachtiids
4. Class Myriapoda:  
The body is divided into large number of segments each having a p air of legs. A pair of antennae 
and a pair of eyes are present on head e.g. centipedes and milli pedes.
General organization of Arthropods
Arthropods have characteristics of higher forms such as bila teral symmetry, triploblastic, coelomic 
cavity and organ systems and have reached the peak of invertebrate evol ution. Two of their main 
achievements are the chitinous exoskeleton and locomotary mechanism. Thes e animals can walk, 
swim and ly. The jointed appendages (limbs) have been modiied or  diversiied for various uses in 
the diferent sub-groups of Arthropoda.
Chitin is non-living, non-cellular and is secreted by the under  lying epidermis. It is made of 
polysaccharide.On the outer side of chitin,there is a waxy layer . In some Arthropods and in certain 
parts in other Arthropods chitin is soft and lexible, in others it is hard. In general, it is for protection 
but it also serves as lever for the movement of muscles of jointed limb s. The chitin in the jaws is 
used for biting and crushing food. It also forms lens of the com pound eyes the copulatory organs 
and organs of defence and ofence.2710. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
In the young Arthropods such as insect larvae, chitinous exoskeleton is shed from time to time to 
allow the growth of the larva. This process of shedding of exoskeleton is called moulting or ecdysis. 
In short the exoskeleton of chitin in the Arthropods is one of the prim ary factors in the success of 
Arthropoda as it helps them to adapt to a wide variety of habitat. 
Arthropods share with annelids the characteristic of having th e body divided into similar segments. 
In Arthropoda however segmentation is not metameric and organs are not r epeated in the diferent 
segments. Each somite typically is provided with a pair of jointed  appendages. But this arrangement 
is often modiied with both segments and appendages specialized for diferent functions in diferent 
habitats. However, in all kinds of habitat the jointed appendages p rovide an eicient means of 
locomotion, ofence and defence and also help in reproduction.
Economic Importance
Man and insects have been at war for the same food, same place to l ive in. Insects attack man, 
his domestic animals and also his crops, causing a number  of diseases. They are not only a health 
hazard but also cause economic loss to man by destroying his pr operty and crops. Some insects are 
also useful to him such as the honey bee or the silk worm. Ins ects are therefore of great importance 
to mankind.
1.   Harmful Insects : Many types of mosquitoes, lies, leas, lice and bugs transmit di sease 
causing organisms to man and domestic animals. We are famil iar with mosquito of genus Anopheles , 
the female of which transmits Plasmodium  that causes malaria in man. The Tse-tse ly of African 
countries transmits Trypanosoma, the cause of sleeping sickness a nd skin diseases. The common 
house ly carries disease causing organisms to contaminate food an d cause cholera, hepatitis etc. 
Some species of Trypanosoma  cause diseases in cattle, also.
A number of insects lay eggs on fruits and other commercial cr ops such as sugarcane, maize, 
cotton and also on vegetables etc. The larvae of these insects damage fru its and the crops resulting 
in economic loss to farmers. The locusts that move in large numbers  from country to country cause 
damage to standing crops and other plants.
2.    Beneicial insects : The useful insects are the honey bee that provides man with honey an d 
also wax. Similarly the silk worm gives us silk. There ar e some insects that are predaceous on other 
harmful insects. Some insects are scavengers and they eat up de ad animal and vegetable matter. 
Insect larvae are source of food for ish.2810. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1PHYLUM MOLLUSCA (L. Molluscus - soft)
General Characters
The phylum Mollusca consists of diverse group of organisms wh ich include slow-moving snails and 
slug, bivalved clams, and highly active cephalopods. The phy lum includes over 50,000 living species 
and is the second largest phylum of invertebrates. Giant squid is  the largest invertebrate animal.
Molluscs also show a great diversity of form but all are built on  the same basic plan. 
Molluscs are triploblastic coelomates which exhibit bilateral sym metry. Most animals possess shell.
The body is covered by a glandular epithelial envelope called ma ntle which secretes calcareous 
shell. The shell is protective, however it is handicap to locomotion, therefore some of the more 
active molluscs show a reduction or loss of shell. 
Molluscs are widely distributed. Some groups are exclusively aq uatic (e.g., cephalopoda), freshwater 
or marine. The others include terrestrial animals (land snai l) living mostly in moist places.
The body is unsegmented and soft. The body can be divided into hea d, a ventral muscular foot 
and a dorsal visceral mass containing most of the internal orga ns. Over the visceral mass mantle 
is present which secretes a shell. The space between the shell and mantle cavity contains gills in 
some animals. In the mouth cavity of many molluscs there is a ra sping tongue-like radula  provided 
with many horny teeth.
The body is highly organized with complex digestive, respira tory, circulatory, excretory, nervous 
and reproductive systems.
Digestive system consists of gut with two openings, the mouth and the an us.
The excretory organs are paired nephridia.
Except for Cephalopoda, the circulatory system is open. The coelom is  divided into sinuses or blood 
spaces. Heart pumps the blood into the sinuses. A respiratory pi gment of blue in color, called 
haemocyanin  is present.2910. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1  
The gaseous exchange is by gills mostly. In some cases such a s snail, the mantle cavity is converted 
into a lung.
The nervous system consists of three pairs of interconnected ganglia p resent in the head, foot and 
body regions.
The organ of locomotion is a muscular foot, however in many species  the movement is slow. The 
others are sessile i.e. unable to move.
The sexes are separate. Trochophore larva develops during embryologi cal development.
Classiication
The molluscs are classiied into six classes. The major class es are:
(i) Gastropoda
These are asymmetrical and their body is covered with usually  coiled one piece shell. The animal 
can withdraw itself into the shell. Both aquatic and terrestrial s pecies are included in this class. The 
aquatic species have gills while in land forms the mantle ca vity is converted into lungs.
The common examples are:
i.    Helix aspersa : It is commonly termed garden snail.
ii.   Limax  the slug
(ii) Bivalvia (Pelecypoda)
This class includes bilaterally symmetrical aquatic mollus cs. The body is laterally compressed and 
is enclosed by two pieces of shells hence the name bivalves. They r espire by plate-like gills.
The common examples are:
(i)     Mytilus : (marine mussel).                                 (i i)    Anodonta : (freshwater mussel),
(iii)   Ostrea : (oyster).3010. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(iii) Cephalopoda
The members of this class are bilaterally 
symmetrical with dorso-ventrally lattened 
body. All species are aquatic. The shell is much 
reduced and internal. In most cases it is absent. 
The animals are highly developed and active.
The common examples are:
i.     Loligo :  (squid).
ii.    Sepia :  (cuttleish).
iii.   Octopus
                                                                                                 
                                
 
Economic Importance of Mollusca                     
Some molluscs are indirectly harmful to man but most of them are b eneicial. The harmful molluscs 
are slugs and shipworms. Slugs are injurious to gardens an d cultivations. They not only eat leaves 
but also destroy plants by cutting their roots and stems. Teredo, a shipworm damages wooden 
parts of ships. But many molluscs are great source of food for m an in many parts of world. Large 
quantities of clams, oysters and mussels are eaten in Far-east, E urope and America. Oysters are 
regarded as delicacy.
Shells of freshwater mussels are used in button 
industry. Also shells of oysters are mixed with 
tar for making roads in America. Shells in 
certain parts of the world are also used for 
making ornaments. Some oysters also make 
valuable pearls e.g. the pearl oyster.
   Fig. 10.11 Examples of molluscs
The brain of octopus is exceptionally large and complex for an 
invertebrate brain. It is enclosed in a shell-like case of ‘Cartilage’, 
and endows the octopus with highly developed capabilitie s to 
learn and remember. In laboratory, octopus can rapidly learn t o 
associate certain symbols and can open a screw cap jar to obtain 
food.3110. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1PHYLUM ECHINODERMATA - The Spiny skinned animals
General Characteristics
There are over 5,000 known species of echinoderms. They are marin e organisms living at the sea 
bottom.
The body is covered by delicate epidermis. The mesodermal cells develop  a irm calcareous  
endoskeleton which may bear spines and because of its origin, f rom mesoderm it is called 
endoskeleton.
Echinoderms are triploblastic coelomates and exhibit radial symm etry. The mouth is on lower 
surface (oral) and anus is on upper surface (aboral). 
The echinodermata are exclusively marine and most of them are found at the bottom along shorelines 
in shallow seas. Most species are free) moving however some are attac hed to the substratum.
All the larval forms of these animals exhibit bilateral symmetr y but the adults show radial symmetry 
which is an adaptation for their special mode of life.
The body may be lattened like biscuit (cake urchin), star-shap ed with short arms (starish) globular 
(sea urchin), star-shaped with long arms (brittle star) or elon gated (sea-cucumber). There is a central 
disc from which arms radiate. 
The most unique characteristics of echinoderms is that a water vas cular system is present in their 
coelom. It is a complex system of tubes and spaces surrounding the mouth and passing into the 
arms and tube feet. The water circulates through these channels. Wa ter enters these canals through 
a sieve-like plate called madreporite present on the aboral body sur face.
The motile species move with the help of tube feet. Each tube foot is a soft saclike structure present 
along the edges of grooves present in the arms.
The echinoderms exhibit low degree of organization. There are specia lized organs for digestion and 
reproduction, but there are no specialized organs for respiration or  excretion. The nervous system 
is also poorly developed. There is no brain, however a nerve ring is present around the pharyngeal3210. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1region. Similarly the circulatory system is poorly organized. 
The sexes are separate and the fertilization is external. The larvae such as bipinnaria  and 
brachiolaria  are complex, exhibit bilateral symmetry, and resemble those of chor dates.
Regeneration , the ability to reform lost organs is common among echinoderms, sta rish, sea 
cucumber, sea lily, brittle star and sea-urchin exhibit this characteristics. 
    
The echinoderms are comparatively simple in structure, organiza tion and physiology, and deserve a 
place slightly below the annelid worms. However, these are placed at the top of the list of invertebrate 
phyla. This is because there are a number of striking resembl ances, between the echinoderms and 
chordates, such as :
a. There is radial cleavage during the development of embryos in both phyla.
b. The blastopore forms the anus in echinoderms 
as well in chordates (Deuterostomes).
c. There are certain common biochemical 
peculiarities among echinoderms and chordates 
e.g. phosphocreatin is present in both.
The common examples are:
Asterias  (starish):
Sea urchin            Sea cucumber 
Cake urchin         Brittle star                                                
                                                     
Echinodermata / Afinities
Echinodermata do not show close relationship to most invertebrates, but they  do show ainities 
with hemichordata. Both these have a number of common features among  which are the formation 
of coelom and retention of blastopore as the site for future anus. In b oth mesoderm is derived from 
the cells close to the blastopore. Both possess mesodermal endskeleton where as the exoskeleton 
is ectodermal in orgin while in invertebtrates the blastopore develops into mouth.
 Fig. 10.12 Examples of Echinoderms.3310. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The above resemblances between two phyla are neither accidental nor due to convergent evolution 
but are because the two are closely related and both emerged from  the same (common) ancestor. 
Echinoderms also show very close resemblance with chordates because both have mesodermal 
skeleton, are deuterostomous, in both lower chordates and echinoderms the ea rly development is 
almost similar. That is why they have been placed closest to ph ylum chordata.
Phylum Hemichordata
Hemichordates are a group that has a combination of both invertebrate ( Echinoderm) and chordate 
characteristics.
The hemichordate along with Echinoderms and chordates belong to the g roup deuterostome 
branch of animal kingdom.
Because of their close relationship to chordates these animals are ca lled prechordates. The common 
examples of this phylum are Balanoglossus  and Saccoglossus .
General Characters
1.    Soft bodied worm-like animali.
2.    Body is divided into an anterior proboscis, collar and tr unk. 
3.    Body wall is made of unicellular epidermis with mucu s-secreting cells.
4.    Digestive tract is straight and may show variations.
5.    Coelomic cavities correspond to each of the three body regions i. e. that of proboscis, collar and 
       trunk coelomic pouches.
6.    Circulatory system consists of a median dorsal and a median ventral vessel.
7.    Respiratory system is composed of gill-slits forming a d orsal row behind collar.
8.    Excretory system has single glomerulus connected to blood vessel s.
9.    Nervous system has a sub-epidermal plexus of cells and ibres.3410. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                         
    Fig. 10.13 Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus
Phylum Chordata
This great phylum derives its name from one of the few common cha racteristics of the group - 
The notochord. This structure is possessed by all members of the ph ylum either in the larval or  
embryonic stages or through out life. The notochord is a rod-like s emi rigid body of vacuolated 
cells which are illed with proteinaceous material which extends i n most cases the length of the 
body between enteric canal and the dorsal hollow central nervous s ystem. Its primary purpose is 
to support and to stifen the body that is to act as skeletal axis.
It seems that the endoskeleton is the chief basic factor in the developmen t and specialization of 
higher animals.
The animals most familiar to us belong to the chordates includin g man himself.
The chordates show great variety and inhabit all kinds of habita t. All chordates possess three basic 
characters which are as follows:
1.    As already mentioned all possess the notochord.
2.    All chordates have central nervous system that is dorsal in  position and is hollow.
3.    All chordates develop paired gill openings in embryonic  stage. In some these are non-functional,  
       while in others they are functional for some period in thei r liie history e.g. frogs etc. in still other   
      these are functional throughout life e.g. amphioxus, and i shes etc.3510. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1         
Fig. 10.14 Amphioxus
Chordates have been divided into lower chordates, e.g. Amphioxus  etc. and higher chordates which 
are the vertebrates in which the notochord is replaced by the vertebra l column and a bony brain 
case cranium is also formed due to which they are also called craniates. Phylum Chordata has been 
sub-divided as follows:
Protochordata (Acrania) (Lower Chordates)
Sub-phylum: Urochordata :  Notochord and nerve cord only in the fee-swimming larvae. Adults 
are sessile and enclosed in a covering called tunic. Therefore, th ey are also called tunicates e.g. 
Molgula.
Sub-phylum:  Cephalochordata: Notochord and nerve cord extend along the entire length of the 
body and persist throughout life e.g. Amphioxus.3610. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                           Table 10. 2 Classiication of Phylum Chordates
Sub-Phylum Vertebrate (Craniate) (Higher chordates)
It includes animals which have cranium in which the brai n is enclosed. It includes animals with 
vertebral column that means that all chordates in this, group are under subphylum vertebrata and 
are therefore vertebrates. Table 10.2 gives an outline of classiication of sub-phylum vertebrata.
It is customary to place vertebrates into two super classes.
(1) Pisces (Fishes) which includes class cyclostomata, cl ass chondrichthyes, class osteichthyes.
(2) Tetrapoda (Four footed) which includes the classes amphibia , reptilia, aves and mammalia.
The former is made up of strictly aquatic forms and the latter of the land dwelling animals. 
Vertebrates maybe divided into anamniotes or those without foetal membran es (cyclostomata, 
chondrichthyes, osteichthyes and amphibia) and amniota or those w ith foetal membranes (reptilia, 
aves and mammals)3710. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Superclass Pisces
This super class includes classes, cyclostomata, chondric hthyes and osteichthyes. The class 
cyclostomata includes most primitive living vertebrates which are with out jaws. This distinguishes 
them from the rest of the vertebrates. They are represented by the lampreys a nd hagish. Some of 
their characteristics are as follows:
1.    Body is long eel-like.                                                 2.     Scales absent.
3.    No paired appendages.                                            4.     Cartilaginous Skeleton.
5.    Ventral Suctorial mouth.                                          6.     Heart with one auricle.
7.    Six to fourteen pairs of gills.                                    8.     Digestive system lacks stomach.
9.    Sexes are separate in lampreys. Hag ishes are hermaphrod ite.
10.  Fertilization external and there is a long larval period in Lamprey.
  Fig. 10.15 Lamprey
Class Chondrichthyes
This group includes the sharks and rays which have skeleton of  cartilage but have many resemblances 
to the bony ishes, the cartilaginous skeleton is considered a degenerated jbharacter rather than 
primitive character. Their main features are:
1.     Body fusiform.
2.     Mouth ventral olfactory sacs not connected to mouth cavity.
3.     Placoid scales on the body.
4.     Endoskeleton entirely cartilaginous.3810. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.15.     Digestive system with J-shaped stomach.
6.     Circulatory system has many pairs of aortic arches.
7.     Respiration by means of 5 - 7 pairs of gills without the covering i.e. operculum.
8.     No swim bladder.
9.     Sexes separate.
10.   Oviparous or viviparous
With the exception of whale the sharks are the largest living vertebrates,  some reaching 30 - 50 feet 
in length.
The skates and rays are bottom dwelling ishes. In these the anterior pairs of ins (Pectoral ins) are 
much enlarged and are used for swimming like wings. Two me mbers of this group are of special 
interest (1) the sting rays and (2) electric rays.
In the sting ray the tail is long & whip-like and has sharp spines which can inlict very dangerous 
wounds. The electric ray on the other hand has certain dorsal mus cles modiied into powerful 
electric organ which can give severe shocks & stun their prey.
Sharks are of economic importance; most are highly destructive to ish , lobsters & crabs. In some 
parts of the world sharks are used as food by man. Commerciall y shark liver oil is extracted and 
used in medicine as a source of vitamin A and D and shark sk in leather is used for making articles.
Fig. 10.16 Shark3910. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Following are the characteristics of bony ishes :
1.   They have more or less bony skeleton which has replaced the c artilaginous skeleton.
2.   Notochord may persist in parts.
3.   The skin has embedded dermal scales which may be ganoi d, cycloid or ctenoid scales. No 
       placoid scales.
4.    Fins both, median (single) or paired and have in rays  of cartilage or bone.
5.    Mouth is terminal. Jaws either with or without teeth.
6.    Respiration by gills supported by bony gill arches an d covered by operculum.
7.    A swim bladder is usually present with or without conn ection with the pharynx. This helps in 
       bouyancy.
8.    Two chambered heart with one atrium and one ventricle. Blood h as nucleated red cells.
8.    Brain with 10 pairs of cranial nerves.
9.    Sexes are separate, gonads paired. Fertilization is usu ally external.
Adaptations to Aquatic Life:
The major adaptations in ishes for the aquatic mode of life are as  follows:
1.   Stream - lined body  (boat shaped) The body of ish is such that it ofers little resista nce to water 
      while swimming.
2.   Swim bladder:  This is found in most bony ish except a few; it may or may n ot be connected to  
       pharynx. It is mainly a hydrostatic organ & can ch ange the gravity of ish by illing itself with gas. 
        The ish qan thus loat high or sink lower in water. T he gases that ill the swim bladder are either 
       oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen and may be secreted by the gland in the swim bladder 
       itself. In those ishes in which the swim bladder is c onnected to pharynx the bladder may be 
       illed by gulping of air.
3.    Fins:  Fins are another important adaptation to aquatic life and are of tw o types
        (1) paired ins (Pectoral and Pelvic) and (2) unpa ired ins which are dorsal, caudal (tail) and anal 
        ins. Fins help in swimming as they keep balance of  ish in water.
4.    Circulatory System :  Heart with two chambers, with aferent & eferent branchial system.
5.    Respiratory system:  In most ishes respiratory organs are the gills, adapted to receive ox ygen  
       dissolved in water and remove carbon dioxide in water as the gills have network of blood  
       capillaries4010. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Excretory Organs:  Kidneys of ish are also modiied for excretion in the aquatic envir onment.
The vertebrates already considered are adapted to strict aquatic life. The group of ancient ish 
known as dipnoi  showed modiication of aquatic breathing system to meet the conditions of  
terrestrial life by developing lungs. But this case is only an  incident in the transition to land. There 
are a number of diferences between water and land habitats.
1.    Oxygen is more in the air than in water.
2.    Dissolved substances are present in water for example diferent kinds of salts.
3.    Temperature changes are more drastic in the terrestrial environ ment.
4.    Land habitat provides a great variety of cover and shelter tha n aquatic habitat.
5.    As a medium water provides greater support to the body than ai r.
6.    Land afords a greater variety of breeding places than does water.
In their transition from aquatic to land environment animals had to undergo modiications or 
adaptations to cope with the above conditions on land. This includ ed:
1.   Development of skin for protection against dry conditions of land .
2.   The eggs of land animals are protected by shells from dry ing and mechanical injury. Also the 
       size of the egg is large to provide space for storage of food.
3.   The terrestrial animals developed lungs in place of gills which could take oxygen from air.
4.    In connection with the development of lungs there are correspond ing changes in the circulatory 
       system to take oxygen from air.
5.    For locomotion the paddle-like ins are replaced by jointed ap pendages modiied for walking, 
       running, climbing and lying.
6.    Sensory organs have become more advanced and specialized.4110. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
  Fig. 10.17 Bony ishes
Super class Tetrapoda:  These have 2 pairs of jointed limbs (tetrapods)
Class Amphibia
Amphibians  are on the border line between aquatic and true terrestrial animals.  Fossil evidence 
from the Devonian  period of earths history suggests that a large population of ish b elonging 
to the group lobe-ins (dipnoi) came to live in shallow fresh water. Some of these crawled from 
one pool to another and therefore spent some time on land. This gave rise to the group that we 
recognize as amphibians which are the irst vertebrates to come on lan d. Although amphibians have 
acquired certain characters enabling them to live on land but at the same time they have retained 
some aquatic characters as the result of their dependence on aqu atic habitat. This double life is 
expressed in their name. Structurally they are between the ish on one h and and the reptiles on the 
other. In the transitions from water to land amphibians have developed limbs in place of ins, lungs 
in place of gills and some changes in skin. Their circul atory system’ provides for lung circulation 
but all of them in larval form retain their link with aquatic life by having gills, circulation of blood, 
digestive system which are representative of aquatic mode of life. Be cause of their dependence on 
water for their life history they are not a very successful group of vertebrates and are conined to 
areas only where they can ind water or moist conditions.4210. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The characteristic features of amphibians therefore are:
1.   Skeleton is mostly bony. Body form varies greatly in the difer ent amphibians, tailed or without  
      tail.
2.   Limbs usually four (tetrapod condition) but some are legless  (e.g. caecilians). Webbed feet often  
      present.
3.   Skin smooth and moist with many glands. In some gland s are poisonous, pigment cells  
      (chromatophores) present in the skin. Scales absent.
4.   Respiration takes place by gills in the larval stage and by lungs and skin in the adult.
5.   Heart is 3-chambered with respect to atria and ventricle sin us venosus, truncus arteriosus are 
      present, double circulation takes place through the heart.
6.   Sexes separate, fertilization external, larval stage present.
7.   Changes into adult by metamorphosis. Amphibians are an amniotes.
8.   Amphibians are cold blooded (poikilothermic) animals an d hibernate in winter.
      Examples frogs, toads, and salamander.
Class Reptilia:
Reptiles are adapted for existence solely on land in contrast to amphi bians that are still tied more 
or less to water or moist habitat. This indicates that reptiles have c ertain adaptations not found in 
amphibians. Some of these advancements shown by reptiles are their  characteristic features which 
are as follows:
1.   Reptiles have developed some sort of copulatory organ necessary for internal fertilization.
2.   In amniotic eggs of reptiles the shell is leathery which ca n resist dryness and injury. They have 
      large yolky eggs.
3.   Reptiles have dry scaly skin which is adapted to land l ife.
4.   Reptiles have protective embryonic membranes amnion, allantois, and chorion.
5.   In reptiles the ventricle of heart is incompletely partitioned ensu ring more oxygen 
      supply through blood circulation to all parts of the body.  In crocodiles ventricle is 
      completely partitioned into two.
6.   Most reptiles have better developed limbs well adapted for eicient loc omotion.
7.   Reptiles like amphibians are cold blooded (poikilothermic) and hibernate in winter.
The above characteristics are for terrestrial habitat in which th e reptiles mostly live. However, it is 
an established fact that reptiles have evolved from amphibians by u ndergoing the above changes 
and have become fully terrestrial.4310. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Reptiles lourished throughout Mesozoic era (225-65 million years).  The climate which had been 
suitable for reptiles in that period, became less favourable to them i n tertiary period. So most of 
them became extinct. The existing reptiles belong to four, out of a dozen  or more main lines that 
existed in the past.
The present day reptiles are, irstly, the lizards and snakes. S econdly the tuatra (sphenodon) of 
New Zealand, which have survived upto today with little change. Th irdly the crocodiles, which are 
an ofshoot from the stock from which modem birds were derived. The rep tiles of today have been 
derived from dinosaurs of Jurassic (195-136 million years),  and cretaceous period (136-65 million 
years). 
The modem reptiles for the most part live in the temperate and tropical zon es indeed they lourish 
only in the latter.
                   Fig. 10.18 Amphibians and Reptiles4410. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Class Aves - Birds
Birds are one of the most interesting and most widely known group of animals. Birds share with 
mammals the highest development in the animal kingdom. It is beli eved that both birds and 
mammals have evolved from reptiles along diferent lines. The earliest k nown bird fossil is that 
of archaeopteryx, two species of which have been found from rocks of Jurassic period of earth’s 
history. The fossil shows that archaeopteryx, was about the size of a crow with skull similar to 
that of present day birds. It had bony teeth in the jaw socket unli ke modem birds which do not 
have teeth. Jaws extended into a beak and there was a long tail. Each  wing had three claws. With 
the exception of feathers these birds showed resemblance to the dinosaurs  (giant reptiles of the 
past). Many fossils of birds from later eras of earth history h ave also been found that had teeth. 
The above evidence suggests that birds evolved from reptilian ancestors.  The archaeopteryx and 
others had characteristic of both reptiles and birds and therefore form a connecting link between 
the two distinct groups.
                                 
                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                         ArchaeopteryxIn eagle both
ovaries and
oviducts are
functional.4510. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Characters of Birds
1.    Body is stream-lined and spindle shaped with four divi sions, viz; head, neck, trunk and tail.  
       These are warm-blooded (homeothermic).
2.     Limbs are adapted for lying. The fore-limbs are modii ed into wings and hind limbs for perching  
       and in some birds for running as in ostrich.
3.    There is the epidermal exoskeleton of feathers, legs bear scal es.
4.    The skeleton is light due to air spaces which is an ada ptation for lying.
5.    The skull has large sockets, jaws extend into homy beak , teeth are absent.
6.     The circulatory system has 4-chambered heart and there i s only right aorta which curves to the  
       right side and then bends backwards. 
7.    The lungs have extensions known as air-sacs which exten d into the bones also.
8.    The organ of voice is called syrinx, it is situated at th e lower end of trachea near the origin of 
       the two bronchi.
9.    Excretory system does not have a bladder, urine is semi soli d.
10.  Sexes are separate. Fertilization is internal and eggs ar e of large size with much yolk. Only one 
       ovary and oviduct is functional.
11.  Since birds do not have teeth they have developed a thick muscular  structure (Gizzard) which 
       is used for crushing food.
12.  Some birds have secondarily lost the power of light and are c alled running birds e.g. Ostrich,    
       Kiwi, etc.
     Fig. 10.19 Birds4610. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Class Mammalia - Mammals
The term mammal was given by Linnaeus to the group of animals w hich are nourished by milk 
from the breast of the mother. The group is considered to be the highes t in the animal kingdom. 
Their advancement over other groups is quite pronounced. The most importa nt advancement 
is the evolution and development of their brain (nervous system) over the other vertebrates. It 
is universally accepted by biologists that mammals have evolved from reptilian ancestors, the 
cotylosaurs . This has been determined on the basis of the fossil record which  is easily available 
because of the hard bones that were preserved as fossils, unlike th e birds which have soft bones 
and mostly have not been preserved. The ancestors of mammals lived si multaneously along with 
reptiles during the Jurassic times and have been called mammal -like reptiles. Some were only of 
the size of mice and lived on trees. One of these early reptile was varanope  that was found as 
fossil in Texas. Probably at least ive groups of such mammal- like reptiles developed mammalian 
characters and were 50% mammals. Mammals became dominant i n the Cenozoic period.
   Fig. 10.20 Mammals4710. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1General Characters of Mammals
Although mammals have evolved from reptiles they show many important s tructural diferences. 
These diferences are in fact the general characters of mammals wh ich are as follows:-
1.    Most mammals have a body covering of hair instead of scal es.
2.     There is a muscular diaphragm in mammals that sep arates the thoracic and abdominal cavities. 
       This structure is not found in any previous group.
3.    The lower jaw in mammals is composed of only one large b one and articulates directly with 
       skull.
4.    External ear or pinna in present. There is a chain of th ree bones in the ear Malleus, Incus & 
       Stapes.
5.    Mammals have deciduous and permanent teeth in some mamma ls e.g. man the teeth are in  
       two sets, one in early life the milk teeth and later the per manent teeth.
6.    Mammals have 4-chambered heart and only left aortic arch  (in birds it is right).
7.    Mammals are warm blooded (Homeothermic) animals.
8.    The red blood cells are non-nucleated.
9.    Mammals have well developed voice apparatus, the larynx and  epiglottis.
10.  Most mammals give birth to young (viviparous).
11.  Mammals feed their young on milk produced by mammary g lands of mother. Mammals are 
        
classiied into three sub-classes.
1.    Prototheria             -                       egg -laying mammals
2.    Metatheria              -                       p ouched mammals
3.    Eutheria                  -                       Placental mammals including man4810. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.11. Sub-Class Prototheria  The Prototheria is that group which has characteristics of both  reptiles 
and mammals and therefore form a connecting link between the two. T hey also provide evidence 
of the evolution/origin of mammals from reptilian stock. Certain mem bers of this sub-class are 
adapted for aquatic life as the duck bill which has a bi ll similar to that of a duck and has webbed 
toes. It has thick fur on its body. The female has mammary gl ands to feed the young. Both these are 
mammalian characters. At the same time these animals have cloaca and cloacal opening instead of 
separate openings for digestive system and urinogenital system. Both th ese characters are reptilian 
characters. These animals are found in Australia, e.g. Duck bill Platypus & Echidna (Spiny anteater).
2. Sub-Class Metatheria  Next to Prototheria, the Metatheria are the most primitive mammals They 
are characterized by an abdominal pouch the marsupium  where they rear their young. The young 
when born are immature and are carried by the mother in the mar supium till they develop to their 
maximum. During this period they are fed on the milk produced by the milk glands of mother, the 
nipples of which are in the marsupium. For this reason these a nimals are also called marsupials or 
pouched mammals, e.g. Opossum, Kangaroo and Tasmanian wol f found in Australia and America.
3. Sub-Class Eutheria  This sub-class includes placental mammals. In the body of  mother 
development of young is maximum and the young when bom are fully  developed. In these mammals 
during development a structure known as placenta  is formed through which the fetus is nourished. 
Also the placenta has endocrine function i.e. it produces certai n hormones, for this reason these 
mammals are also called placental mammals.  Placental mammals have maximum mammalian 
characters but in some the hair have become modiied into scales (pan golin) and spines (porcupine). 
Examples are man, whale, elephant, horse, rat, mice, bat, dolph in, etc.
Mammals being a very successful group live in all kinds of habitat i.e. land, fresh water and sea for 
which their bodies are modiied.4910. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q1.       Fill in the blanks.
              (i)     Frotozons have been placed in a separ ate kingdom known as _________________ .
              (ii)    The sponges do not have any symmetry a nd are therefore called______ .
        
              (iii)   Between ectoderm and endoderm the coelenterate  have a non cellular _____________.
              (iv)   Taenia solium  has_______ and ________ for attachment to the intestine of host. 
              (v)    In annelids the body segmentation of the ty pe known as _____________ .
              (vi)   In insects there are ______________ p airs of legs present in the ___________region of the 
                      body.
              (vii)  The organ of locomotion in molluscs is th  e____________ .
              (viii) In animals where there are deinite left & r ight sides the symmetry is _______________.
              (ix)   The system in which water move inside th e body of an echinoderm is called
                       _____________. 
              (x)    Coelom is the body cavity formed from the_ ________________ layer.5010. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
Q.2.      Each question has few options. Encircle the  correct answer.
                  Vertebrates that develop embryonic membranes arou nd their embryo are called (Amniotes, 
              Anamniotes)
              (i)         In animals the bodies of which  can be divided in two equal halves only in one 
                          plane are (asymmetrical, bila terally symmetrical, radially symmetrical)
              (ii)        Animals that have their body cavi ty illed with parenchyma are (Acoelomates, 
                          Coelomate, Pseudocoelomates)
              (iii)       The vertebrates in which placenta is formed during the development of faetus are  
                          (Pisces,Aves, Mammalia)
              (iv)       In amphibians the necessary req uirements to spend their life history are (land, 
                          water, or both)
              (v)        Trypanosoma causes the diseases ( Malaria, Sleeping sickness)
              (vi)       ln annelids the organs or excretion are (lame-fcells, nephridia, kidneys) In 
                           arthropoda the body cavity is (p seudocoeloms, enterocoel, haemocoel)
              (vii)      In mollusca the foot is used for (c apturing prey, locomotion, or both)
Q .3.     Extensive questions.
              (i)         What are Cnidaria? Explain the diploblastic origin, alternation of generations in  
                          cranidaria.
              (ii)        Describe the parasitic adaptati ons in phylum platyhelminthes - How does
                          tape worms afect a person.
 
              (iii)       Give the symptoms of the disease cau sed by certain nematodes.
              (iv)       Give an account of the major groups of  Arthropods. What is the economic
                          importance of insects.5110. Kingdom Animalia eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1             (v)      Give the two major classes of the pisces an d explain the adaptations of aquatic mode      
                       of life in ishes.
             (vi)     Give the adaptations for aerial mode of lif e in birds. What is their origin.   
             (vii)    What are the general characteristics of mammals? How do the three subclasses
                       protheria, metatheria and eutheria dif er from one another.
             (viii)   Distingnish between the following by gi ving examples
                       (a) Radial and Bilateral Symmetr y.
                       (b) Diploblastic and triploblastic  animals.
                       (c) Anamniotes and amniotes.