18. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CHAPTER
8 Fungi
     The Kingdom Of
Recyclers
Animation 8.1: Kingdom Fungi
Source & Credit: unifyingprinciplesofbiology28. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Approximately 100,000 species of organisms called “ fungi ” are known and many more are 
estimated to be present. This group includes notorious pathogens such  as disastrous rusts, smuts 
of wheat and com, and molds found growing on important crops an d foodstuf. Delicacies such as 
mushrooms, trules and morels, and other organisms of commercial use such as Penicillium  - the 
source of antibiotic penicillin, and the yeasts  - used in bakeries and breweries are also members 
of this group. Ecological role of fungi as decomposers is paral leled only by bacteria.
Taxonomic status of fungi has changed from that of ‘a group of  Plant kingdom’ to a separate 
kingdom “Fungi”. They resemble plants in some respects - have ce ll wall, lack centrioles and are 
non-motile. But fungi resemble more animals than plants. Unlike plants and like animals, fungi are 
heterotrophs, lack cellulose in their cell wall and contain chitin  - the chemical found in external 
skeleton of arthropods . For this reason, some mycologists  (scientists who study fungi) think that 
fungi and animals probably arose from a common ancestor. But fungi are diferent from animals 
in having cell wall, being absorptive heterotrophs and non-motile. S o fungi are neither plants nor 
animals. Their DNA studies also conirm that they are diferent from  all other organisms. They show 
a characteristic type of mitosis, called ‘ nuclear mitosis ’. During nuclear mitosis, nuclear envelope 
does not break; instead the mitotic spindle forms within the nucleus  and the nuclear membrane 
constricts between the two clusters of daughter chromosomes. (In some fu ngi nuclear envelope 
dismantles late). Because fungi are distinct from plants, ani mals and protists in many ways, they 
are assigned to a separate kingdom ‘Fungi’.
THE BODY OF FUNGUS
The body of a fungus, called mycelium , consists of long, slender, branched tubular thread like 
filaments called the hyphae  (singular hypha ). Hyphae spread extensively over the surface of 
substratum. Chitin in their wall is more resistant to decay than are cellulose and lignin  which 
make up plant cell wall. Hyphae may be septate or non-septate. Septate  hyphae are divided by 
cross-walls called septa  (singular septum) into individual cells containing one or more nuclei. Non-
septate hyphae lack septa and are not divided into individual cell s; instead these are in the form 
of an elongated multinucleated large cell. Such hyphae are cal led coenocytic  hyphae, in which 
cytoplasm moves effectively, distributing the materials throughout. S epta of many septate fungi38. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1have a pore through which cytoplasm flows from cell to cell, car rying the materials to growing tips 
and enabling the hyphae to grow rapidly when food and water are abundant and temperature is 
favourable. All parts of fungus growing through the substrate a re metabolically active. Extensive 
spreading system of hypae provides enormous surface area for abs orption.
Fig 8.1 The fungus body plan : (a) Fungus mycelium growing on  agar plate (b) Hyphae of mycelium (c) A coenocytic hypha  (d) A septate 
hypha with porous septa and monokaryotic cells (e) A septa te hypha with dikaryotic cell.
Hyphae may be packed together and organized to form complex 
reproductive structures such as mushrooms, puf balls, morels etc.  
which can expand rapidly. Yeast are non-hyphal unicellul ar fungi. 
All fungal nuclei are haploid  except for transient diploid zygote  
that forms during sexual reproduction.
NUTRITION IN FUNGI
All fungi lack chlorophyll and are heterotrophs (obtaining car bon and energy from organic 
matter). They obtain their food by direct absorption from the immediate environment and are 
thus absorptive heterotrophs . Most fungi are saprotrophs  (or saprobes ), decomposers  that 
obtain their food (energy, carbon and nitrogen) directly from dea d organic matter. They secrete out 
digestive enzymes  which digest dead organic matter, and the organic molecules th us produced
A single mycelium may produce upto 
a kilometer of new hyphae in only one 
day. A circular clone of Armillaria, a 
pathogenic fungus alicting conifers, 
growing out from a central focus, has 
been measured upto 15 hectares (1 
hectare = 10000 m2). Could it be the 
world’s largest organism?48. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1are absorbed back into the fungus. Saprobic fungi anchor to the substrate by modiied hyphae, 
the rhizoids . Fungi are the principal decomposers of cellulose and lignin,  the main components 
of plant cell walls (most bacteria cannot break them). Extensive s ystem of fast growing hyphae 
provides enormous surface for absorptive mode of nutrition. Saprobic fungi, alongwith bacteria, 
are the major decomposers of the biosphere, contributing to the recycling  of the elements (C, N, P, 
0, H etc) used by living things.
Some fungi are parasites , some are even predators , and still others are mutualists . Parasitic  
fungi absorb nutrients directly from the living host cytoplasm with the help of special hyphal tips 
called haustoria . They may be obligate or facultative. Obligate parasites can grow  only on their 
living host and cannot be grown on available deined growth culture medium. Various mildews  
and most rust species are obligate parasites. Facultative parasites  can grow parasitically on their 
host as well as by themselves on artiicial growth media.
Some fungi are active predators . The oyster mushroom ( Pleurotus ostreatus ) is an omnivorous 
(predatory) fungus. It paralyses the nematodes (that feed on this f ungus), penetrate them, and 
absorb their nutritional contents, primarily to fulil its nitrogen requirements. It fulills its glucose 
requirements by breaking the wood. Some species of Arthrobotrys  trap soil nematodes by forming 
constricting ring,  their hyphae invad and digest the unlucky victim. Other predator s have other 
adaptations, such as secretion of sticky substances.
Fig 8.2 Carnivorous fungi (a) The osyter mushroom decomposes wood, a nd also uses nematodes as a source of nitrogen (b) A nematode  
is trapped in constricting ring of a soil - dwelling carnivorous fu ngus  (Arthrobotrys sp.) .58. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fungi form two key mutualistic symbiotic associations (associati ons of beneit to both partners). 
These are lichens  and mycorrhizae .
Lichens  are mutualistic symbiotic associations between certain fungi ( mostly Ascomycetes and 
imperfect fungi, and few Basidiomycetes - about 20 out of 15000  species of lichens) and certain 
photoautotrophs-either green algae or a cyanobacterium, or some times both . Most of the visible 
part of lichen consists of fungus, and algal components are p resent within the hyphae (Fig 8.3). 
Fungus protects the algal partner from strong light and desicca tion and itself gets food through the 
courtesy of alga.
Lichens can grow at such places where neither of the components al one can, even at harsh places 
such as bare rocks etc. Lichens vary in colour, shape, overall  appearance, growth form (Fig 8.3). 
They are ecologically very important as bioindicators of air pollu tion.
Video 8.2: Fungal network
Source and Credit: pmb.ox.ac68. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 8.3 Lichens (a) Cross section of a typical lichen showi ng diferent layers, (b) Diferent types of lichens varying in  size, colour and 
appearance. Three growth forms - crustose grow tightly attached to rocks, tree trunks etc; foliose are leaf - like, fruticose are bra nching.78. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Mycorrhizae  are mutualistic association between certain fungi and roots of vasc ular plants (about 
95% of all kinds of vascular plants). The fungal hyphae  dramatically increase the amount of soil 
contact and total surface area for absorption and help in the direc t absorption of phosphorus, zinc, 
copper and other nutrients from the soil into the roots. Such plants sh ow better growth than those 
without this association. The plant, on the other hand, supplies org anic carbon to fungal hyphae.
There are two main types of mycorrhizae (Fig 8.4): endomycorrhizae , in which the fungal hyphae 
penetrate the outer cells of the plant root, forming coils, swellings, and minute branches, and also 
extend out into surrounding soil; and ectomycorrhizae , in which the hyphae surround and extend 
between the cells but do not penetrate the cell walls of the roots. These are mostly formed with 
pines, irs etc. However, the mycelium extends far out into the soil in both kinds of mycorrhizae.
Fig 8.4 Endomycorrhizae and ectomycorrhizae. (a) In endomycorrhi za (left side of igure), fungal hyphae penetrate and branch out 
in a root cells. In ectomycorrhiza (right side of igure), fungal h yphae simply grow around but do not penetrate the root cell (b ) 
Ectomycorrhizae on roots of pines.
Fungi grow best in moist habitats, but are found wherever organic  matter is present. They survive 
dry conditions in some resting stage or by producting resistant sp ores. They can also tolerate a 
wide range of pH from 2 - 9, a wide temperature range, and hig h osmotic pressure such as in 
concentrated salt/sugar solutions as in jelly, jam etc. These fea tures also help them in their survival 
on land. Fungi store surplus food usually as lipid droplets  or glycogen in the mycelium.88. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1REPRODUCTION
Most fungi can reproduce asexually as well as sexually (ex cept imperfect fungi in which sexual 
reproduction has not been observed). 
Asexual reproduction
Asexual reproduction  takes place by spores, conidia, fragmentation, and budding. Spores  are 
produced inside the reproductive structures called sporangia , which are cut of from the hyphae 
by complete septa. Spores may be produced by sexual or asexual p rocess, are haploid, non-motile 
and not needing water for their dispersal, are small, produced in very large number and dispersed 
by wind to great distances and cause wide distribution of many kinds of fungi, including many plant 
pathogens. When spores land in a suitable place, they germinate, giving rise to new fungal hyphae. 
Spores may also be dispersed by insects and other small anima ls and by rain splashes. Spores are 
a common means of reproduction in fungi.
Conidia (singular conidium) are non- motile, asexual spores w hich are cut of at the end of modiied 
hyphae called conidiophores , and not inside the sporangia, usually in chains or clus ters. These 
may be produced in a very large number, can survive for weeks a nd cause rapid colonization of 
new food.
Fragmentation  is simple breaking of mycelium of some hyphal fungi, each broken fragment giving 
rise to a new mycelium.98. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Unicellular yeasts reproduce by budding  (an asymmetric division in which tiny outgrowth or bud is 
produced which may separate and grow (Fig 8.7), or by simp le, relatively equal cell division.
Fig. 8.7 Micrograph shows yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) i n various stages of budding.
Sexual Reproduction
Details of sexual reproduction vary in diferent groups of fungi bu t fusion of haploid nuclei and 
meiosis are common to all. When fungi reproduce sexually, hypha e of two genetically diferent but 
compatible mating types come together, their cytoplasm fuse followed b y nuclear fusion. In two of 
the three main groups of fungi (Basidiomycetes, Ascomycetes), fus ion of nuclei ( karyogamy ) does 
not take place immediately after the fusion of cytoplasm ( plasmogamy ); instead the two genetic 
types of haploid  nuclei from two individuals may coexist and divide in the sa me hyphae for most 
of the life of the fungus. Such a fungal hypha/cell having 2  nuclei of diferent genetic types is called
dikaryotic  (also heterokaryotic ) hypha/cell (Fig. 8.1).
Diferent groups of fungi produce diferent types of haploid sexual s pores, such as basidiospores  
and ascospores , subsequent upon meiosis in zygote. These spores may be produced b y their 
characteristic structure/fruiting bodies such as basidia/basidiocarps  and asci/ascocarps .108. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CLASSIFICATION OF FUNGI
Classiication of fungi into four main groups is based prima rily on the type of their sexual 
reproductive structures and methods of reproduction. However, these groups also difer in the 
type of hyphae and some other characters (Table 8.1).
                                                    Table 8.1 Classiication of Fungi
Phylum (group) Typical examples Sexual
reproductionAsexual
reproductionHyphae
Zygomycota
(Zygomycetes)Rhizopus , (Black
bread mold)
Pilobolus  (spitting
fungus)Zygospores Non-motile
spores form in
sporangiaNonseptate,
multi
nucleate
Ascomycota
(Ascomycetes or
sac - fungi)Yeasts, morels,
trules, powdery
mildews,moldsAscospores
inside sac-like
asciConidia cut
of from tips
of
conidiophoresSeptate,
lengthy
dikaryotic
phase.
Basidiomycota
(Basidiomycetes
or club-fungi)Mushrooms, rusts,
smuts, pufballs,
bracket fungiBasidiospores
borne on club
shaped basidiaUncommon Septate,
lengthy
dikaryotic
phase
Deuteromycota
(Deuteromycetes/
Imperfect fungi)Aspergillus,
Penicillium,
AltemariaSexual phase
has not been
observedConidia Varied
Zygomycota (Zygomycetes or Conjugating Fungi)
During their sexual reproduction, zygote formed directly by the fusi on of hyphae forms temporary, 
dormant, thick walled resistant structure called zygospore, hence th e name Zygomycetes. Meiosis 
takes place when zygospore germinates and haploid spores are prod uced. Spores on germination 
produce new mycelium. Asexual reproduction by spores is common . Hyphae are coenocytic.
Example: Rhizopus, found growing on spoiling moist bread, fr uit etc.118. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 8.8 Life cycle, of Rhizopus (black bread mold), a Zygom ycete. Zygote formed by fusion, of gametangia directly develops into a 
resting zygospore.
Ascomycota (Ascomycetes or Sac - Fungi)
It is the largest group of fungi, including over 60,000 species , 50% or so occurring in lichens and 
some, such as morels, are mycorrhizal. Most are terrestrial, thoug h some are marine or fresh water. 
The group shows diversity from unicellular yeasts to large cup fungi and morels. They produce 
haploid sexual spores called ascospores  by meiosis inside their characteristic sac like structures 
called asci (sing.ascus). Meiosis follows nuclear fusion inside the asc us, commonly 8 ascospores 
are produced inside each ascus. Most sac-fungi have asci in side macroscopic fruiting bodies called 
ascocarps -the visible morels etc. Their hyphae are septate. They have lengthy d ikaryotic phase 
that forms ascocarps. They reproduce asexually by conidia th at are often dispersed by wind.  
Yeasts  are unicellular microscopic fungi, derived from all the three d iferent groups of fungi but 
mostly Ascomycetes, and reproducing mostly asexually by budd ing (Fig. 8.7).128. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1However yeasts reproduce sexually by forming asci/ascospores or ba sidia/basidiospores. 
They ferment carbohydrate (glucose) to ethanol and carbondioxide. B ecause of this 
feature and many other reasons, these are of great economic importan ce (see economic 
importance of fungi). Saccharomyces cerevisiae  is the most commonly exploited yeast.138. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Basidiomycota (Basidiomycetes or Club - Fungi)
These are among the most familiar fungi; edible mushrooms, devasta ting plant pathogens rusts 
and smuts, pufballs, and bracket/shelf fungi are all clu b fungi. Basidiomycetes are named so for 
their characteristics, club-shaped (hence also called club f ungi) sexual reproductive structure, the 
basidium  (plural basidia ). Nuclear fusion in the basidium is followed by meiosis.
Fig. 8.10 Basidiomycetes. A mushroom’s fruiting structures. T he gills on underside of mushroom’s cap are lined with basid ia, on which 
basidiospores are produced.
Four haploid sexual spores, called the basidiospores , 
are born on, not inside, each basidium. During most 
part of their life cycle the hyphae are septate; the cells 
are uninucleate during one phase, and binucleate 
(dikaryotic) during the remaining, lengthy phase. Their 
characteristic fruiting bodies, or visible mushrooms, 
are formed entirely of dikaryotic mycelium. Puccinia  
species are most common rust fungi, and Ustilago  
species most common smut fungi.
Rusts  are called so because of numerous 
rusty, orange-yellow coloured disease 
spots on their host surface (mostly stem, 
leaves), later revealing brick/rust-red 
spores of the fungus. Smuts  are called 
so because of their black, dusty spore 
masses that resemble soot or smut; 
these spore masses replace the grain 
kernels such as those of wheat, corn etc. 
(Fig. 8.11, 8.15)148. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Spores (teliospores) of Ustilago tritici  (loose smut of wheat) are carried by wind from infected wheat 
ears to healthy lowers, where they germinate. The resulting hyphae pen etrate lower ovaries. 
Inside the ovary mycelium spreads and becomes dormant and remain s so in the seed (grain). When 
such infected seeds are sown next season, the hyphae also grow withi n the growing plant and form 
smut spores inside the kernel, thus destroying them completely. The covering of the grain breaks 
exposing the black spores mass, that may be dispersed by wind  (Fig. 8.11)
Fig. 8.11: Disease cycle of loose smut of wheat caused by a  club - fungus (Ustilago tritici)158. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Deuteromycota (Deuteromycetes or Imperfect Fungi)
This heterogenous group includes all such fungi in which sex ual phase has not been observed. 
Most of them are related to their sexually reproducing relatives of Ascom ycetes; however some 
are related to other two phyla (Zygomycota, Basidiomycota) as well. I f sexual structures are found 
on an imperfect fungus, it is then reassigned to the appropr iate phylum. Biologists now can classify 
most imperfect fungi on the basis of DNA sequences, though sexual s tructures may not be found.
Penicillium  (blue, green molds), Aspergillus  (brown molds), Alternaria, Fusarium, Helminthosporium  
are some of the economically important genera of Deuteromycetes (see economic i mportance of 
fungi).
Penicillium  sp. (blue, green molds) are wide spread saprotrophic species common on decaying 
fruit, bread etc. Its hyphae are septate. Penicillium  reproduces asexually by means of naked spores 
called conidia . These are found in chains at the tips 
of special hyphae called conidiophores , which are 
branched. Brush-like arrangement of its conidia is 
characteristic of Penicillium  (Fig. 8.12). These conidia 
give colour to the mycelial colony, which is circular. 
Mature conidia are easily and readily dispersed.Despite absence of sexual reproduction, imperfect fungi 
show special kind of genetic recombination, called 
parasexuality, in which portions of chromosomes of 
two nuclei lying in the same hypha are exchanged.
Animation 8.3: Moldy Peach
Source and Credit: wikipedia168. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 8.12 Penicillium (a) A moldy orange; the blue mold i s caused by saprobic species of Penicillium. (b) Penici llium showing asexual 
reproduction, characteristic brush-like arrangement of conidia.
LAND ADAPTATIONS OF FUNGI
Fungi; although grow best in moist habitats, are found wherever or ganic matter is present. They are 
a successful group of land organisms, and posses several featu res in their body and reproduction 
that adapt them to their habit and terrestrial mode of life.
Extensive system of fast-spreading hyphae penetrate the substrate and  enormously increase the 
contact and surface area for absorption. Cytoplasmic low throughou t the hyphae is responsible for 
their rapid growth and spread. Chitin in their thickened hyph al wall is more resistant to decay than 
are cellulose and lignin found in plant cell wall. They can  even break down the lignin (in addition to178. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1cellulose) to obtain their nutrients. In saprobes, certain modiied hy phae called rhizoids  anchor the 
fungus to the substrate and also digest and then absorb the food.
They are very well adapted to live on land due to lack of lagellated c ells, nonmotile spores and 
conidia eicient dispersal by wind, thick-walled zygote and other  resistant structures. Hyphae may 
be modiied in such a way as to enable them to reproduce themselves with out dependence on 
external water.
Many fungi are more tolerant than are bacteria to damage in hyper osmotic surroundings. Many 
can tolerate temperature extremes - 5°C below freezing and 50°C or more.  Now you can tell why 
molds (e.g. Penicillium ) can grow on oranges and jelly kept in a refrigerator, while g enerally bacteria 
cannot.
IMPORTANCE OF FUNGI
Ecological Importance
Fungi have great ecological impact. They are very important as dec omposers and symbionts. Fungi, 
along with saprobic bacteria, play vital role in the recyclin g of inorganic nutrients in the ecosystem. 
Without their activity all the essential nutrients would soon become lock ed up in the mounds of 
dead animals, plants, would be unavailable for use by organ isms, and life would cease. Mycorrhizal 
fungi improve the growth of plants with which they are associated . 95% of all kinds of vascular 
plants have this association.
Lichens growing on rocks break them, setting stage for other organ isms during the course of 
ecological succession. Lichens are very good bioindicators of air quality as they are very sensitive 
to pollution. Some fungi are also used for bioremediation (degrading /removing environmental 
poisons/pollutants by organisms). 
Commercial Importance
Fungi cause economic gains as well as losses.
Economic gains due to fungi
1. Certain fungi are edible. About 200 species of mushrooms (e.g . Agaricus sp), morels (e.g. Morchella 
esculenta), trules (underground fruiting bodies of some188. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 8.13 Edible fungi (a) A common morel (Morchella esculen ta). (b) The trules (Tuber species) are underground fruitin g bodies that 
people ind with the help of trained dogs or pigs.
Ascomycetes, e.g. Tuber  sp) are common edible fungi. Beware of poisonous mushrooms call ed the 
toadstools , such as death cap/death angel ( Amanita ) and jack-O’ latem mushroom (Fig. 8.14).
Fig. 8.14 a: Poisonous mushroom Jack-O’ lantern (Omphalotus ol earius) whose gills glow in the dark, b: Amanita, another c ommon 
poisonous mushroom.
Reindeer moss (a lichen, not a moss) is used as food for reindeer s and some other large animals in 
arctic/subarctic/boreal regions.
2. Certain fungi are used in food industry. Because of their fer menting ability, yeasts ( Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae ) are used in the production of bread and liquor. Penicillium  species are used for giving 
lavour, aroma and characteristic colour to some cheese. Some species of  Aspergillus are used for198. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1fermenting/producing soya sauce and soya paste from soya bean. Citric acid is also obtained from 
some Aspergillus  species.
3. Some fungi are source of antibiotics and some other drugs. Penicillin , irst antibiotic to be 
ever discovered (by A. Fleming-1928) is obtained from Penicillium notatum . Lovastatin is used for 
lowering blood cholestrol; cyclosporine obtained from a soil fungus  is used in organ transplantation 
forpreventing transplant rejection; and ergotine to relieve one kind of hea dache migraine. 
Griseofulvin is used to inhibit fungal growth.
4. Some natural dyes obtained from lichens are used in textile in dustry.
5. Yeasts are heavily used in genetic/molecular biological resear ch because of their rapid 
generation and rapidly increasing pool of genetic and biochemica l information. Yeast were the irst 
eukaryotes to be used by genetic engineers. In 1983, a functional a rtiicial chromosome was made 
in Saccharomyces cervisiae.  The same yeast was the irst eukaryote whose genomic sequence was 
completely studied in 1996. Yeasts are also being investigated for p roduction of some hormones. 
Pink bread mold Neurospora  has also been used for genetic research.
Economic losses due to Fungi
1. Fungi are responsible for many serious plant diseases becau se they produce several enzymes 
that can breakdown cellulose, lignin and even cutin. All plants  are susceptible to them. Extensive 
damages due to rusts and smut diseases of wheat, com (Fig. 8.1 5) and rice prompted mass 
displacement, and starvation to death of many people. 
Powdery mildews (on grapes, rose, wheat etc), ergot of rye, red rot of sugar cane, Potato wilt, 
cotton root rot, apple scab , and brown rot  of peaches, plums, apricots and cherries are some 
other common plant diseases caused by fungi.
2. Fungi also cause certain animal diseases. Ringworm  and athlete’s foot  are supericial fungal 
infections caused by certain imperfect fungi. Candida albicans,  a yeast, causes oral and vaginal 
thrush ( Candidasis  or candidosis ). Histoplasmosis  is a serious infection of lungs caused by inhaling 
spores of a fungus which is common in soil contaminated with b ird’s feces. If infection spreads into 
blood stream and then to other organs (which is very occassional), it can be serious and even fatal. 
Aspergillus fumigatus  causes aspergillosis , but only in persons with defective immune system such 
as AIDS, and may cause death. Some strains of Aspergillus  produce one of the most carcinogenic208. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(cancer-causing) mycotoxins (toxins produced 
by fungi), called alatoxins . Aspergillus  
contaminates improperlystored grains such 
as peanuts and com etc. Milk, eggs and meat 
may also have small traces of alatoxins. 
Any moldy human food or animal forage 
product should be discarded. Ergotism  is 
caused by eating bread made from purple 
ergot-contaminated rye lour. The poisonous 
material in the ergot causes nervous spasm, 
convulsion, Psychotic delusion and even 
gangrene.
3. Saprobic fungi are not only useful recyclers 
but also cause incalculable damage to food, 
wood, iber, and leather by decomposing 
them. 15-50% of world’s fruit is lost each 
year due to fungal attack. Wood-rotting fungi 
destroy not only living trees but also structural 
timber. Bracket/ shelf fungi (Fig. 8.16) cause 
lot of damage to stored cut lumber as well as 
stands of timber of living trees.
A pink yeast ( Rhodotorula)  on shower curtains 
and other moist surfaces.
Video 8.4: Mushrooms Fungi 
Source and Credit: rebloggy218. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1228. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Q .1.          Short questions
                  (i)             What is a hypha? W hat is the advantage of having incomplete septa?
                  (ii)            What is the composition of fungal cell wall and how is this composition
                                   advantageous to fungi?
                  (iii)           To which phyla do y easts belong? How do they difer from other fungi?
                  (iv)           Name sexual and asexua l spores of Ascomycetes.
                  (v)            What are mycorrhizae?
                  (vi)           By what means can ind ividuals in imperfect fungi be classiied?
                  (vii)          Give a single characteris tic that diferentiates Zygomycota from Basidiomycota.
                  (viii)         Why is green mold more likely to contaminate an orange kept in a refrigerator  
                                  than are bacteria? 
                  (ix)           What is a fungus?
                  (x)            State two parallel char acteristics of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes.
Q.2.           Extensive questions
                  (i)           Discuss taxonomic status of fungi.
                  (ii)          Summarise diferentiating /distinguishing characteristics of four main groups of  
                                Fungi, and give two comm on examples of each group.
                  (iii)         State various features of fu ngi that adapt them to terrestrial mode of life.
                     (iv)         What is ecological imp ortance of saprotrophic fungi, of lichens and mycorrhizae?                                                                  EXERCISE238. Fungi The Kingdom of Recyclers eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                
                  (v)          Same enzymes of fungi are useful on one hand and harmful on other.
                                Discuss.
                  (vi)         Name any four important fu ngal diseases of plants and four fungal diseases of
                                humans, and briely d escribe any one of the plant diseases and any one of the 
                                diseases of humans.
                  (vii)        Describe, giving examples, diferent ways in which fungi are useful to humans.
                  (viii)       Diferentiate between the members of each of the following pairs.
                                (a)                Spore/Conidium                    (b)                 Ascus/Basidium
                                (b)                Dikaryotic/Diploid                 (c)                  Ascocarp/Ascus
                                (c)                 Obligate parasite/Facultative parasite
                                (d)                Endomycorrhizae/Ectomycorrhizae
                                (e)                 Plasmogamy/Karyogamy