17. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CHAPTER
7 THE KINGDOM
PROTISTA 
)OR PROTOCTISTA(
Animation 7.1: Kingdom Protista
Source & Credit: media.giphy27. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The Kingdom Protista consists of a vast assortment of primarily aq uatic eukaryotic organisms whose 
diverse body forms, types of reproduction, modes of nutrition and lif estyles make them diicult to 
characterize. Basically, this kingdom is deined by exclusion  i.e., all members have characteristics 
that exclude them from the other four kingdoms.
All protists are eukaryotic and have evolved from prokaryotes. Another reason for creating a 
separate kingdom arises from the diiculty in placing certain eu karyotic organisms in the appropriate 
kingdom. This diiculty is a consequence of the fact that the other eu karyotic kingdoms have their 
evolutionary origin in kingdom Protista. The other eukaryotic kingd oms Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia 
arose from protists in various ways.
The protists are unicellular, colonial or simple multi cellula r organisms that possess a eukaryotic 
cell organization. Eukaryotic cells, the unifying feature of proti sts, are common to complex multi-
cellular organisms belonging to the three eukaryotic kingdoms (Fu ngi, Plantae and Animalia) but 
clearly diferentiate protists from members of the prokaryotic kingdom (Monera). Unlike plants 
and animals, however, protists do not develop from a blastula or an  embryo.
The kingdom protista contains four major groups of eukaryotic orga nisms which are : single celled 
protozoans, unicellular algae, multicellular algae, slime mold s and oomycotes.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
In 1861, John Hogg proposed the kingdom Protoctista for microscopi c organisms. In 1866, Ernst 
Haeckel suggested creating the Kingdom Protista to include bacteri a and other microorganisms 
(such as Euglena ) that kingdom. He, however, separated blue green algae and bacteria  (prokaryotes) 
from nucleated protists and placed them in a separate group he cal led Monera, within the kingdom 
Protista.
In 1938, Herbert Copeland elevated the prokaryotes to kingdom status , thus separating them from 
Protista. In ive kingdom system of Robert Whittaker (1969) only uni cellular eukarayotes were 
placed in kingdom Protista. Currently this kingdom also inclu des colonial and simple multicellular 
eukaryotes as well. Margulis and Schwartz (1988) modiied the ive kingdom system. Protista or 
Protoctista is one of the ive kingdoms.37. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 7.1 The kingdom protista includes such diverse specie s as (a) single celled ciliated protozoan, (b) giant brown algae (kelps) and (c) 
slime molds.
DIVERSITY AMONG PROTISTA
During the course of evolutionary history, organisms in the kingdom protista have evolved diversity 
in their (a) size and structure, (b) means of locomotion, (c) wa ys of obtaining nutrients, (d) interactions 
with other organisms, (e) habitat and (f) modes of reproduction. Di versity is exhibited by all of the 
major protist groups (Fig. 7.1).
Based on the diversity, most biologists regard the protists kingdom as  a polyphyletic group of 
organisms; that is, the protists probably do not share a single c ommon ancestor. Margulis and 
Schwartz have listed 27 phyla to accommodate this diverse assemblag e of organisms.
MAJOR GROUPS OF PROTISTA
1. Protoz oa : An imal - like Protists
All protozoans are unicellular. Most ingest their food by endocytosis . A summary of protozoan 
diversity is given in Table 7.1.47. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                  Table 7.1 Some groups of protozoa
Common Name Form Locomotion Examples
Amoebae Unicellular, no
deinite shapePseudopods Amoeba, Entamoeba,
Zoolagellates Unicellular.
some colonial          One or more 
          FlagellaTrypanosoma, Euglena,
Actinopods Unicellular Pseudopods Radiolarians
Foraminifera Unicellular Pseudopods Forams
Apicomplexans Unicellular None Plasmodium
Ciliates Unicellular Cilia Paramecium, Vorticella. 
Stentor
(a) Amoebae:
This group includes all free living freshwater, 
marine and soil amoebae as well as those that 
are parasites of animals. Amoebae lack lagella 
and move by forming specialized cytoplasmic 
projections called pseudopodia (false feet). (Fig. 
7.2).
The intestinal parasite, Entamoeba histolytica , 
causes; amoebic dysentery in humans.
Fig. 7.2 The lowing pseudopods of 
Amoeba constantly change shape as the
organism moves and feeds.                                                                   
Animation 7.2: Amoeba 
Source and Credit: Gifsoup57. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                   The Giant Amoeba
The giant amoeba Pelomyxa palustris  may 
be the most primitive of all eukaryote 
like forms. This species has multiple 
membrane-bound nuclei but none of 
the other organelles found in all other 
eukaryotes. The giant amoebas obtain 
energy from methanogenic bacteria, which 
reside inside them. Giant amoebas inhabit 
mud at the bottom of freshwater ponds, 
where they contribute to the degradation 
of organic molecules 
(b) Zoolagellates:
These protists are mostly unicellular (a few are colonial) organi sms with spherical or elongated 
bodies with a single central nucleus. They possess from one to man y long, whip-like lagella that 
enable them to move. Flagellates move rapidly, pulling themselves forwar d by lashing lexible 
lagella, that are usually located at the anterior end.
Flagellates obtain their food either by ingesting living or dead orga nisms or by absorbing nutrients 
from dead or decomposing organic matter. They may be free-living, symbionts or parasites. 
Trichonymphas are complex, specialized lagellates with many l agella which live as symbionts in 
the guts of termites and help in the digestion of dry wood (Fig. 7.3 a)Animation 7.3: Amoeba
Source and Credit: ironic67. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 7.3 Zoolagellates (a) Trichonympha has hundreds of lagel la (b) Trypanosoma causes sleeping sickness.
Animation 7.4: Paramecium Contractile Vacuole
Source and Credit: gif2ly77. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Parasitic lagellates cause diseases. For example 
Trypanosoma  is a human parasite causing African sleeping 
sickness. It is transmitted by the bite of infected tsetse ly 
( Fig. 7.3 b)
Choanolagellates are sessile marine or freshwater 
lagellates which are attached by a stalk and their single 
lagellum is surrounded by a delicate collar. They are of 
special interest because of their striking resemblance to 
collar cells in sponges (Fig. 7.4). 
                                                                                                              Fig. 7.4 A colonial choanolagellate
(c) Ciliates
Ciliates are unicellular organisms with a lexible outer covering called a pellicle that gives them 
a deinite but changeable shape. In Paramecium , the surface of the cell is covered with several 
thousand ine, short, hair-like structures called cilia. The ci lia beat in such a precisely coordinated 
fashion that the organism can go forward, can also go back an d turn around. 
Some ciliates are sessile and remain attached to a rock or other surf ace. Their cilia set up water 
currents that draw food towards them. Most ciliates ingest bacteria or  other tiny protists.
Animation 7.5: Ciliates
Source and Credit: microscopy-uk87. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1               
Fig. 7.5 (a) Paramecium, conjugating individuals (b) Ste ntor, a sessile ciliate. 
Water regulation in freshwater ciliates is controlled by special or ganelles called contractile vacuoles. 
Ciliates difer from other protozoans in having two kinds of nuclei.  One or more small diploid 
micronuclei that function in sexual process, and a large, poly ploid macronucleus that controls cell 
metabolism and growth. Most ciliates are capable of a sexual proc ess called conjugation. During 
conjugation two individuals come together and exchange genetic material  (Fig. 7.5).
Animation 7.6: Paramecium Reproduction
Source and Credit: buzzle97. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 7.7: Paramecium Contractile Vacuole
Source and Credit: gif2ly107. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(d) Foraminiferans and Actinopods
These marine protozoans produce shells (or tests). Tests of foraminif era are made of calcium whereas 
those of actinopods are made of silica. The shells or tests contain p ores through which cytoplasmic 
projections can be extended. These cytoplasmic projections form a stic ky, interconnected net that 
entangles prey. Dead foraminiferans sink to the bottom of the ocean wher e their shells form a grey
mud that is gradually transformed into chalk. Foraminiferans  of the past have created vast limestone 
deposits.
Fig. 7.6 (a) Foraminiferan tests have (a) beautiful geometri c patterns and (b) pores through which cytoplasmic projection s are extended 
(c) Radiolarians are actinopods with glassy shells.
(e) Apicomplexans
Apicomplexans are a large group of parasitic protozoa, some of wh ich cause serious diseases such 
as malaria in humans. Apicomplexans lack speciic structu res for locomotion but move by lexing. 
At some stage in their lives, they develop a spore, a small infective ag ent transmitted to the next 
host. Many Apicomplexans spend part of their life in one host and  part in a diferent host species 
(Fig. 7.7).117. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
                        Fig. 7.7 The life cycle of the malarial parasite (Plasmodium).
Plasmodium , the apicomplexan that causes malaria, enters human blood throug h the bite of an 
infected female Anopheles mosquito. Plasmodium irst enters liver cells  and then red blood cells, 
where it multiplies. When each infected red blood cell bursts,  ma ny new parasites are released. 
The released parasites infect new red blood cells, and the process  is repeated. The simultaneous 
bursting of millions of red cells causes the symptoms of malar ia; a chill, followed by high fever 
caused by toxic substances that are released and afect other organs of the body (Fig. 7.7).
2. Th e Algae: Plan t like protists
Algae (singular alga) are photosynthetic protists, carrying out probably 50 to 60 percent of all the 
photosynthesis on earth (plants account for most of the rest).
Algae difer from the plants in their sex organs which are unic ellular and the zygote is not protected 
by the parent body. A plant zygote, on the other hand, grows into a multicellular embryo that is127. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1protected by parental tissue.
Algae exhibit a remarkable range of growth forms. Some are unicel lular; others are ilamentous. 
Filaments are composed either of distinct cells or coenocytes (multinu cleate structures that lack 
cross-walls), still others (e.g. seaweeds) are multicellular an d intricately branched or arranged in 
leaf-like extensions. A body which is not diferentiated into true roots,  stems and leaves and lacks 
xylem & phloem is called a thallus .
In addition to green chlorophyll a, yellow and orange carotenoids, which are photosynthetic pigments 
are found in all algae, other algal phyla possess a variety of other pigments (such as xanthophylls 
and phycoerythrin) that are also important in photosynthesis. Clas siication into phyla is largely 
based on their pigment composition.
Algal life cycles show extreme variation, but all algae except memb ers of the phylum Rhodophyta 
(red algae) have forms with lagellated motile cells in at least one s tage of their life cycle.
Almost all algae are aquatic. When actively growing, algae are restricted to damp or wet environments, 
such as the ocean; freshwater ponds, lakes, and streams; hot s prings; polar ice; moist soil, trees, 
and rocks. Table 7.2 summarizes the classiication of algae.
Animation 7.8: Algae cell, 
Source and Credit: progressive-charlestown137. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                  Table 7.2 Classiication of the photosynthetic Protocti sts
Phylum Common
nameForm Locomotion Pigments Examples
Euglenophyta Euglenoids Unicellular Two lagella
one long one
shortChl. a, Chl. b
CarotenoidsEuglena
Pyrrophyta Dinolagellates Unicellular Two lagella Chl. a, Chl. c
Carotenes
including
FucoxanthinGonyaulax,
Ceratium
Chrysophyta Diatoms Usually
unicellularUsually none Chl. a, Chi. c
Carotenes
including
FucoxanthinDiatoma,
Frequilaria
Pinnularia
Phaeophyta Brown algae Multicellular Two lagella
on
reproductive
cellsChl. a, Chl. c
Carotenes
including
FucoxanthinFucusi
Macrocvstis
Rhodophyta Red algae Multicellular
or unicellularNone Chl. a,
carotenes
PhycoerythrinChondrus
Polysiphonia
Chlorophyta Green algae Unicellular,
colonial,
multicellularMost have
lagellaChl. a, Chl. b.
carotenesChlorella,
Ulva,
Acetabularia
Spirogyra
Animation 7.9: Euglenam
Source and Credit: microscopy-uk147. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(I) The Euglenoids
Euglenoids  have at various times been 
classiied in the plant kingdom (with algae) 
and in animal kingdom (in protozoans). Based 
on molecular data, euglenoids are thought 
to be closely related to zoolagellates. They 
are plant like in their pigments. However, 
some photosynthetic euglenoids lose their 
chlorophyll when grown in dark and obtain 
their nutrients heterotrophically by ingesting 
organic matter. Other species of euglenoids 
are always colourless and heterotrophic (Fig. 
7.8).
                                                                             
Animation 7.10: Euglenoids, 
Source and Credit: gifsoup    Fig 7.8 : Euglenoids have special evolutionary                                                                                                                                     
    s i g n i i c a n c e  a s  t h e y  r e s e m b l e  w i t h  p l a n t s  a n d                                                                                                                                               
   green algae in having similar pigments and,                                                                                                                                             
   on the other hand, are also related One of                                                                                                                                               
      the most unusual protist to zoolagellates.157. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(ii) Dinolagellates
One of the most unusual protist phyla is that of dinolagellates. Mos t dinolagellates are unicellular. 
Their cells are often covered with shells of interlocking cellulose p lates impregnated with silicates.
Ecologically, dinolagellates are one of the most important groups of p roducers (second only to 
diatoms) in marine ecosystem. Dinolagellates are known to have occasi onal population explosions 
or blooms. These blooms frequently colour the water orange, red or br own and are known as red 
tides (Fig. 7.9).Animation 7.11: Euglenoids
Source and Credit: sgprotist.iles.wordpress167. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 7.9 (a) A dinolagell ate showing cellulose plates in  the shell and lagella located in the grooves, (b) A red t ide.
Animation 7.12: Dinolagellates
Source and Credit: microscopy-uk177. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(iii) Diatoms
The cell wall of each diatom consists of two shells that overlap wher e they it together, much like a 
petri dish. Silica is deposited in the shell, and this glassl ike material is laid down in intricate patterns.
Fig. 7.10 Diatoms have silica shells with extremely beau tiful symmetrical patterns
Diatoms are the major producers in the aquatic (marine and fr eshwater) ecosystems because of 
their extremely large numbers. Diatoms are very important in aquatic food chains (Fig. 7.10).
Animation 7.13: Diatoms
Source and Credit: 49.media.tumbl187. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(iv) Brown Algae
Brown algae include the giants of the protist kingdom. All br own algae are multicellular and range 
from a few centimeters to approximately 75 meters in length. The larg est brown algae, called the 
kelps are tough and leathery in appearance. They possess lealike blades, stemlike stipes, and 
rootlike anchoring holdfast. Brown algae are common in cooler mari ne waters, especially along 
rocky coastlines in the intertidal zone (Fig. 7.11). Animation 7.14: Diatoms
Source and Credit: ininity-usa197. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                              Fig. 7 .11 Laminaria, a brown alga showing blades, stipes and hol dfast207. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(v) Red Algae
The multicellular body form of red algae is commonly composed 
of complex interwoven ilaments that are delicate and feathery. A 
few red algae are lattened sheets of cells. Most multicellular red 
algae attach to rocks or other substances by a basal holdfast. Som e 
red algae incorporate calcium carbonate in their cell walls fr om the 
ocean and take part in building coral reefs alongwith coral an imals 
(Fig. 7.12).Animation 7.15: Brown algae
Source and Credit: easterncapescubadiving
Fig. 7.12 Polysiphonia is a  
representative red alga with world 
wide distribution217. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                                                                                    
Animation 7.16: Red Algae
Source and Credit: easterncapescubadiving
Animation 7.17: Red Algae
Source and Credit: makeagif227. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(vi) Green Algae
Green algae have pigments, energy reserve products, and cell wall s that are identical to those of 
plants. Green algae are photosynthetic, with chlorophyll a, chlorop hyll b, and carotenoids present 
in the chloroplasts. Their main energy reserves are stored as starch . Most green algae possess 
cell walls with cellulose. Because of these and other similarities  it is generally accepted that plants 
arose from ancestral green algae. Evidence from RNA sequencing al so indicates that green algae 
and the plants form a monophyletic lineage (Fig. 7.13).
Animation 7.18: Green Algae
Source and Credit: easterncapescubadiving237. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 7.13 Green algae exhibit diverse forms, (a) Unicellula r Chlamydomonas (b) Desmids have cells with two halves. ( c) Colonial Volvox 
(d) Filamentous Spirogyra (e) Ulva, having sheet like body .
Chlorella  is a unicellular non-motile green 
alga. Its habitat is fresh water ponds and 
ditches. It is easily cultured and has been used 
as an experimental organism in research on 
photosynthesis as well as being investigated 
as an alternate source of food.247. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Impor tance of Algae
Algae have great economic and environmental importance for us. Some al gae such as kelps are 
edible and may be used to overcome shortage of food in the world. Marin e algae are also source of 
many useful substances like algin, agar, carrageenan, an d antiseptics. Algae are major producers 
of the aquatic ecosystem, thus they play a basic role in food chai ns, providing food and oxygen to 
other organisms.
3. FUNGUS-LIKE PROTISTS
Some protists supericially resemble fungi in that they are not photosy nthetic and some have bodies 
formed of threadlike structures called hyphae. However, funguslike  protists are not fungi for several 
reasons. Many of these protists have centrioles and produce cellulose a s a major component of 
their cell walls, whereas fungi lack centrioles and have cell  walls of chitin. Two major groups of 
fungus-like protists are : Slime molds and water molds (oomycotes) .
(i) Slime molds or Myxomycota
The feeding stage of a slime mold is a plasmodium, a multinuc leate mass of cytoplasm that can 
grow to 30 cm (1 ft) in diameter. The plasmodium, which is s limy in appearance, streams over damp,
Fig. 7.14 Slime mold Physarum  (a) The plasmodium is a naked mass of cytoplasm having many nuclei. (b) Reproductive structures 
are stalked sporangia.257. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1decaying logs and leaf litter. It often forms a network of chann els that cover a large surface area. As 
it creeps along, it ingests bacteria, yeasts, spores and decayi ng organic matter (Fig. 7.14).
During unfavourable condition, slime mold forms resistant hapl oid spore by meiosis within stalked 
structures called sporangia. When conditions become favourable aga in, spores germinate into 
bilagellated or amoeboid reproductive or swarm cells which unite to f orm diploid zygote. Zygote 
produces multinucleate plasmodium, each nucleus being diploid .
The plasmodial slime mold Physarum polycephalum  is a model organism that has been used to 
study many fundamental biological processes, such as growth a nd diferentiation, cytoplasmic 
streaming, and the function of cytoskeleton.
Animation 7.19: Slime mould
Source and Credit: 49.media.tumbl
Animation 7.20: Slime mold physarum
Source and Credit: waynesword.palomar267. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Water molds or Oomycotes
Oomycotes show close relations with the fungi and have a similar structure, but are now regarded 
as more ancient group. Their cell walls contain cellulose, not c hitin. Their hyphae are aseptate 
(without cross walls). Oomycotes include a number of pathogenic organisms, including Phytophthora 
infestans , which have played infamous roles in human history.
 
Fig. 7.15 Phytoplithora infestans growing in a diseased potat o leaf, with sporangiophores emerging from the underside of the leaf.
Phytophthora infestans  was the cause of Irish potato famine of the 19th century. It causes  a disease 
commonly known as late blight of potatoes. Because of several rainy,  cool summers in Ireland in 
the 1840’s, the water mold multiplied unchecked, causing potato tub ers to rot in the ields. Since 
potatoes were the staple of Irish peasants’ diet, many people (250,000  to more than 1 million) 
starved to death. The famine prompted a mass migration out of Irelan d to such countries as the 
United States (Fig. 7.15).277. The Kingdom Protista (or protoctista) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Q.1.           Short Questions
                  Write two characteristics of each of the follow ing groups:
                  (i)             Protozoa                                           (ii)                 Dinolagellates
                  (iii)           Diatoms                                            (iv)                 Slime molds
                  (iv)           Oomycetes
Q.2.           Extensive question.
                  (i)             Discuss important featu res of protists. Why are protists so diicult to classify?
                  (ii)            What are the reasons for  grouping simple eukaryodc organisms into a 
                                  separate kingdom, proti sta?
 
                  (iii)           How are protists importa nt to humans? What is their ecological importance?
                  (iv)           What are three major group s of protists?
                  (vi)           Discuss general charac teristics of algae.
                  (vii)          Green algae are considered ancestral organisms of green land plants. Discuss.
                   (viii)       What features distinguish  Oomycotes from fungi?
                  (ix)         Describe structure and repr oduction of slime molds.                                                                  EXERCISE