CHAPTER
1  Introduction
Animation 11.1: Levels of Organization
Source & Credit: wonderwhizkids21. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1BIOLOGY AND SOME MAJOR FIELDS OF SPECIALIZATION
Biology is the study of living things. It is a branch of scien ce and like other sciences it is a way of 
understanding nature. Biologists deal with the living part  of nature and with the non-living things 
which afect the living things in any way. they strive to understan d, explain, integrate and describe 
the natural world of living things. The literal meaning of biolog y is the study of life.
It is very diicult to deine life. There are certain aspects of life th at lie beyond the scope of the 
science of biology like the answers to the questions : what is the mea ning of life? Why should there 
be life? These are the questions not usually taken up by Biologists  and are left to philosophers and 
theologians. Biologists mainly deal with the matters relating to how l ife works.
Life, for biologists, is a set of characteristics that distinguis h living organisms from non-living 
objects (including dead organisms). Living organisms are hi ghly organized, complex entities; are 
composed of one or more cells; contain genetic program of their charac teristics; can acquire and 
use energy; can carry out and control numerous chemical reactions ; can grow in size; maintain a 
fairly constant internal environment; produce ofspring similar to themselves; respond to changes 
in their environment.
Any  object  prossessing  all  these  characteristics simulta neously can be declared as a living thing 
and in an object for biological studies.
The science of biology is a very wide based study. It includes ever y aspect of a  living thing. Therefore, 
volumes and volumes of information are available under this major head. It is  but natural to divide 
the science into quite a number of branches for our convenience of c omprehending and studying 
biology.
     
You are surely familiar, at this stage, with Ecology, Embryolog y, Physiology, Morphology (external 
Morphology or Anatomy), Palaeontology, Histology, Evolution, Genetics, Zoog eography etc. These 
are branches of biology  which deal with environmental relations, development, functions, structure, 
form and internal gross structure, fossil, tissues, ancestral h istory, heredity and distribution of 
animals in nature, respectively. In addition to these branches there are a number of other branches 
of biology such as: Molecular Biology, microbiology, Marine Bi ology, Environmental Biology, 
Freshwater Biology, Parasitology, Human Biology, Social Biology,  Biotechnology, etc.31. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
Molecular Biology
Molecular biology is a branch of biology which deals with the structure of organisms, the cells and 
their organelles at molecular level.
Animation 11.2 : Biology
Source & Credit: popkey
Animation 11.3 : Molecular Biology
Source & Credit: wilegif41. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Environmental Biology
Environmental Biology is the study of organisms in relation to their environment. This includes 
interaction between the organism and their inorganic and organic en vironment, especially as it 
relates to human activities.
Microbiology
This is the study of microorganisms which include Bacteria, Viruses, Protozoa and microscopic 
algae and fungi..
Freshwater Biology
This branch of biology deals with the organisms 
living in freshwater bodies i.e., rivers, lakes etc 
and physical and chemical parameters of these 
water bodies.
Animation 11.4 : Microbiology
Source & Credit: giphy
Animation 11.5: Freshwater Biology
Source & Credit: primogif51. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Marine Biology
This is the study of life in seas and oceans. This includes  the study of the marine life and the physical 
and chemical characteristics of the sea acting as factors for m arine life.
Parasitology
This is the branch of biology which deals with the study of pa rasites. The structure, mode of 
transmission, life histories and host - parasite relationships a re studied in parasitology.
Human Biology
It deals with the study of man. This includes form and structu re, function, histology, anatomy, 
morphology, evolution, genetics, cell biology and ecological studies etc . of human beings.
Social Biology
This is the branch of biology which deals with the study of soc ial behaviour and communal life of 
human beings.
Biotechnology
It deals with the use of living organisms, systems or processes in  manufacturing and service 
industries.
Animation 11.6 : Mariene Biology
Source & Credit: rebloggy61. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1LEVELS OF BIOLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
Hundreds of chemical reactions are involved in maintaining life of even the simplest organism. In 
view of this, it is something of surprise to ind that of the 92 natur ally occurring chemical elements, 
only 16 are commonly used in forming the chemical compounds from which living organisms 
are made. These 16 elements and a few others which occur in a p articular organism are called 
bioelements. 
In the human body only six bio-elements account for 99%of the total m ass.
Animation 11.7 : Biotecnology
Source & Credit: fz-juelich71. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 1.1 Percentage composition of bioelements by mass of a hum an being
The fact that the same 16 chemical elements occur in all organism s, and the fact that their properties 
difer from those in the non living world, shows that bioelements have s pecial properties which 
make them particularly appropriate as basis for life.
Biological organization is not simple. It has high degree of comp lexity because of which the living 
organisms are able to carry out a number of processes (some very c omplicated) which distinguish 
them from the non living things. A living thing has built-in r egulatory mechanisms which interact 
with the environment to sustain its structural and functional integri ty.
A living thing is, therefore, composed of highly structured living  substance or protoplasm. In order 
to understand the various phenomena of life, biologists for their conveni ence, study the biological 
organization at diferent levels starting from the very basic level of su b atomic and atomic particles 
to the organism itself and beyond which the study of community, pop ulation and entire world are 
included. 
Biological organization can be divided into the following levels.81. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 1.2 . Levels of Organization91. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Atomic & Subatomic Levels
All living and nonliving matter is formed of simple units cal led atoms and sub atomic particles such 
as protons, electrons & neutrons.
Molecular Level
In organisms elements usually do not occur in isolated forms. Th e atoms of diferent elements 
combine with each other through ionic or covalent bonding to produce c ompounds. This stable form 
is called a molecule. Hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosph orous and  Ca are the most common 
atoms found in biological molecules. The diferent types of bonding arrangement permit biological 
molecules to be constructed in great variety and complexity. These may be micromolecules  with 
low molecular weight like C02, H20 etc. or macromolecules with high molecular weights e.g. starch, 
proteins etc.
Biological world has two types of molecules: organic and inorgan ic. An organic molecule is any 
molecule containing both carbon and hydrogen. Inorganic molecules  do not include carbon and 
hydrogen together in a molecule. 
An organism is usually formed by enormous number of micro  and macro molecules  of hundreds 
of diferent types. Some most important and abundant organic molecules  in organisms are glucose, 
amino acids, fatty acids, glycerol, nucleotides like ATP, ADP,  AMP etc.
Animation 11.8 : Molecular Level
Source & Credit: answers101. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Organelles & Cell
Diferent and enormous number of micromolecules and macromolecules ar range themselves in 
a particular way to form cells and their organelles. In case of  simple organisms like bacteria and 
most protists, the entire organism consists of a single cell. In mos t fungi, plants and animals, the 
organism may consist of up to trillions of cells. 
Numerous sub-cellular structures like mitochondria, Golgi-complex , endoplasmic reticulum, 
ribosomes etc have been studied for their structure and function. It ha s become clear that functions 
of the cells are accomplished by these specialised structures com parable to the organs of the body. 
These structures are called organelles .
The arrangement of the organelles speaks of the division of labour w ithin the cell. The prokaryotes 
have only a limited number and type of organelles in their cytoplas m. Eukaryotes are rich in number 
and kinds of membranous organelles. A cell membrane is however present in all cells whether 
prokoryotic or eukaryotic. 
Tissue Level
In multicellular animals and plants, groups of similar c ells are organized into loose sheets or bundles 
performing similar functions; these are called tissues. Each ti ssue has a particular function in the 
life of the organism e.g. muscle tissue, glandular tissue, xyl em tissue, phloem tissue etc. They are 
specialized for contraction (movement), secretion, conducting water and  for translocation of sugar, 
proteins etc.
Animation 11.9 : Cell Organelles
Source & Credit: answers111. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Organ & System
Diferent tissues having related functions, assemble together in a struc ture to carry out its function 
with great eiciency. Such structures are called organs and they are specialized to perform particular 
functions. For example stomach which is an organ has a func tion of food digestion (protein part), 
has a secretory epithelium which secretes the gastric juice, and a  muscular tissue (smooth) for 
contracting the walls of the stomach and mixing the food with the enz yme thoroughly and moving 
the food to the posterior end. The formation of organs also has a sel ective value because this leads 
to an eicient accomplishment of their functions both qualitatively and  quantitatively. In animals
      
Animation 11.10: Cell Organelles
Source & Credit: answers121. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1organ formation is far more complex and deined. Organs are par t of organ systems where total
functions involved in one process or phenomenon are carried out. 
The organ level of organization is much less deinite in plants tha n it is in animals. At the most, 
we might distinguish roots, stems, leaves and reproductive structures.  Clear cut functions, the 
distinguishing features, can be assigned to each of these structur es. Roots are involved in anchoring 
the plant, storage of food and procuring water and minerals. The shoot supports the entire plant 
while the leaves are primary organs for food manufacture. Flowers or other reproductive structures 
are involved in producing the next generation (reproduction).
The complexity of the organ systems of animals is associated with a far greater range of functions 
and activities than is found in plants.
Individual (Whole Organism)
Various organs in plants and various organ systems in anima ls are assembled together to form an 
individual - the whole organism. The whole organism has its i ndividuality as far as its characteristics 
are concerned. It is diferent from other members of the same species in  certain respects. The 
various functions, processes, activities of an organism are coordin ated. In an animal all the systems 
work in coordination with each other. For instance if a man is en gaged in continuous and hard 
exercise, not only his muscles are working but there is an increa se in the rate of respiration and 
heart beat to supply the muscles with increased oxygen and food whi ch they need for continuous 
exercise. In animals the coordination is achieved by means of nervou s system and endocrine 
system, whereas in plants only long term regulation of activities is  brought about by hormones. 
Organism works as a whole and it interacts and responds to the en vironmental changes as a whole.
Population
A population is a group of living organisms of the same species  located in the same place at the 
same time. Examples are the number of rats in a ield of rice, the number of students in your 
biology class, or human population in a city.
Population is a higher level of biological organization than organ ism (whole) because here a group 
of organisms of the same species is involved. This level of organi zation has its own attributes which 
come into being by living together of a group of organisms of the sam e species.
Some of these attributes are gene frequency, gene low, age distribution, population density, 
population pressure etc. All these are new parameters which have ap peared due to population of 
an organism. You will study them in detail in population ecology .131. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Community
Populations of diferent species (plants and animals) living in  the same habitat form a community. 
Communities are dynamic collections of organisms, in which one population may increase and 
others may decrease due to luctuation in abiotic factors. Some commun ities are complex and 
well interrelated, other communities may be simple. In a simple com munity any change can have 
drastic and long lasting efects.
The foregoing account makes it clear that an organism can be stud ied at diferent levels of 
organization. It can be studied at subatomic, atomic, molecular, macromolecular, organelle, cell, 
tissue, organ and organ system level. We can also look at it as an  individual, as a part of population 
of similar individuals, as a part of a community that inclu des other populations and a part of 
community of an ecosystem which includes abiotic factors as well  as living organisms, Fig. 1.2.
The organisms, interaction can take many shapes. It may be pred ation, parasitism, commensalism, 
mutualism and competition. 
Living World in Space
Living world of today is enormous in size. It has been reproduci ng and evolving since the time 
of its origin on this planet. Today almost all parts of the world  abounds in living organisms. The 
distribution of organisms in space can be studied through biomes .
A biome  is a large regional community primarily determined by clim ate. It has been found that the 
major type of plant determines the other kind of plants and animals . These biomes have, therefore, 
been named after the type of major plants or major feature of the ecosy stem. The major biomes of 
the world you will study in the chapter of ecology.
LIVING WORLD IN TIME
Since the time of origin of life on this planet, various organisms were evolved and dominated 
this planet during various periods of geological time chart. Thi s has been found by the evidence 
obtained from the discovery and study of fossils which allows b iologists to place organisms in a 
time sequence. As geological time passes and new layers of sediments  are laid down, the older 
organisms should be in deeper layer, provided the sequence of the lay ers has not been disturbed.141. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1In addition it is possible to date/age rocks by comparing the amou nts of certain radioactive isotopes 
they contain. The older sediment layers have less of these speciic rad ioactive isotopes than the 
younger layers. A comparison of the layers gives an indication  of the relative age of the fossils 
found in the rocks. Therefore, the fossils found in the same layer must have been alive during the 
same geological period.
You can have an idea about the temporal distribution of various form s of life both plants and 
animals in the various geological periods ( ig.1.3).
Fig 1.3. Fossil record of plants and animals shown in a geologi cal time chart151. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Phyletic Lineage
When we look at the biodiversity (the number and variety of species in a place), we ind that there 
are nearly 2,500,000 species of organisms, currently known to science. More than half of these 
are insects (53.1%) and another 17.6 % are vascular plants. Animals other than insects are 19.9 % 
(species) and 9.4 % are fungi, algae, protozoa, and various p rokaryotes.
This list is far from being complete. Various careful estimates put the total number of species 
between 5 and 30 millions. Out of these only 2.5 million species have been identiied so  far.
The life today has come into existence through Phyletic lineages or evolvi ng populations of the 
organisms living in the remote past. Evolutionary change often produc es new species and then 
increases biodiversity. A phyletic lineage is an unbroken seri es of species arranged in ancestor to 
descendant sequence with each later species having evolved from one that i mmediately proceded 
it. If we had a complete record of the history of life on this planet,  every lineage would extend 
back in time to the common origin of all early life. We lack th at record because many soft bodied 
organisms of the past had not left their preserved record as fossil s.
Biological Method
Science is a systematized knowledge. Like other sciences, biological  sciences also have a set 
methodology. It is based on experimental inquiry. It always begin s with chance observation. 
Observations are made with ive senses viz, vision, hearing, smell, taste and touch, depending 
upon their functional ability. Observations can both be qualitative and quantitative. Quantitative 
observations have accuracy over qualitative as in the former variabl es are measurable and are 
recorded in terms of numbers. An observer organizes observations into data form and gives 
a statement as per experience and background knowledge of the event. Thi s statement is the 
hypothesis,  which is tentative explanation of observations.
At this stage you should look at the ways of devising hypothesis. T here are two ways of formulating 
hypothesis. A hypothesis can be the result of deductive reasoning or  it can be the consequence of 
inductive reasoning.
Deductive reasoning  moves from the general to the speciic. It involves drawing speciic con clusion 
from some general principle/assumptions. Deductive logic of “if  . ...... then” is frequently used to 
frame testable hypothesis. For example, if we accept that all bird s have wings (premise #1), and that 
sparrows are birds (premise # 2), then we conclude that sparrows  have wings. If all green plants161. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1require sunlight for photosynthesis, then any green plant when pla ced in dark would not synthesize 
glucose, the end product of photosynthesis.  The other way of reasoning  used in the formulation 
of hypothesis is inductive reasoning  which is reasoning from the speciic to the general. It begins 
with speciic observations, and leads to the formation of general prin ciple. For instance, if we know 
that sparrows have wings and are birds, and we know that eagle,  parrot, hawk, crow are birds, then 
we induce (draw conclusion) that all birds have wings. The s cience also, therefore, uses inductive 
methods to generalize from speciic events.
  
In fact sometimes scientists also use other ways to form a hypothesis,  which may include (1) 
intuition or imagination (2) esthetic preference (3) religious or ph ilosophical ideas (4) comparison 
and analogy with other processes (5) discovery of one thing while l ooking for some other thing. 
These ways can also sometimes form basis for scientiic hypothesis . Hypotheses as you already 
know, are subjected to rigorous testing.
Repeated exposure of a hypothesis to possible falsiication increases s cientist’s conidence in the 
hypothesis when it is not falsiied. Any hypothesis that is tested ag ain and again without ever being 
falsiied is considered well supported and is generally accepted.  This may be used as the basis for 
formulating further hypothesis. So there is soon a series of hypotheses  supported by the results of 
many tests which is then called a theory. A good theory is predicti ve and has explanatory power. 
One of the most important features of a good theory is that it may sugges t new and diferent 
hypotheses. A theory of this kind is called productive.
Animation 11.11 : Biological Method
Source & Credit: wikispace171. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1However even in the case of productive theory the testing goes on. In fact man y scientists take it as 
a challenge and exert even greater eforts to disprove the theory. If a theory survives this skeptical 
approach and continues to be supported by experimental evidence, it bec omes a scientiic law. A 
scientiic law  is a uniform or constant fact of nature, it is virtually an ir refutable theory. Biology is 
short in laws because of elusive nature of life.
Examples of biological laws are Hardy-Weinberg law and Mend el’s laws of inheritance. You will learn 
about them in later chapters. You can see that laws are even more genera l than theories and aford 
answers to even more complex questions, therefore there are relatively a few l aws in biology.
BIOLOGY AND THE SERVICE OF MANKIND
The science of biology has been helping mankind in many ways  in increasing food production; in 
combating diseases and in protecting and conserving environment. Bi ological advances in the ield 
of food and health have resulted in high standard of living.
Plant production has been tremendously increased by improving exis ting varieties and developing 
new high-yield and disease - resistant varieties of plants and animals used as food.
Plant and animal breeders have developed, through selective breeding, u sing the principles of 
genetics, new better varieties of wheat, rice, corn, chicken, cow and sheep. Poultry breeders have 
developed broilers for getting quick and cheap white meat. Genes for di sease resistance and other 
desirable characters are introduced into plant, using the techniqu es of genetic engineering . Such 
transgenic plants (plants having foreign DNA incorporated into their cells) can be p ropagated 
by cloning  (production of genetically identical copies of organisms/cells by asexual reproduction) 
using special techniques such as tissue culture techniques  etc. Plant pathogenic fungi and insect 
pests of crops which weaken the plants and reduce the yield ha d traditionally been controlled 
by using chemical fungicides and insecticides (pesticides).  Use of these chemicals poses toxicity 
problems for human beings as well as environmental pollution. Mor eover, there are chances of 
insects becoming resistant to the efect of these chemicals. Biological control  (control by some 
living organisms) eliminates all such hazards. In biologic al control, pests are destroyed by using 
some living organisms that compete with or even eat them up. An aphid  that attacks walnut tree is 
being controlled biologically by a wasp that parasitizes this aphid.181. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Even some bacteria are being used as bio-pesticides. Efective control of  a particular disastrous 
disease, or all the common diseases of a plant can be achieved by using all relevant, appropriate 
methods of disease control. Such an approach of disease control is called “ integrated disease 
management ”.
Soil is a complex medium. It is almost impossible to conduct exper iments on nutrient requirements 
of plants by growing them in soil. Hydroponic culture technique  is used to test whether a certain 
nutrient is essential for plant or not. In this technique the plants are grown in aerated water to 
which nutrient mineral salts have been added. Hydroponic farmin g, however, is yet not feasible. 
Astronauts may use it for growing vegetables.
Diferent techniques of food preservation have been developed for protecting food f rom spoilage 
and for its use and transport over long distance without damaging its quality. One of these is 
pasteurization,  developed by Louis Pasteur. It is being widely used for preservation  of milk and 
milk products.
    
Disease Control
There has been fantastic progress in the area of health and dis ease control. Three pronged actions 
are usually taken against various diseases.
1. Preventive measures                                     
2. Vaccination/Immunization
3. Drug treatment/Gene therapy
Preventive measures
The advances in biological sciences have provided us information a bout the causative agents of 
the diseases and their mode of transmission. For instance the AIDS ( Acquired Immune Deiciency 
Syndrome) is caused by HIV (human immuno deiciency virus) and it spreads through free sexual 
contact, through blood transfusion, by using contaminated syring es or surgical instruments etc. 
Therefore, doctors advise us to take precautions on these fronts so that we d o not contract the 
disease, which is at present incurable. Similarly hepatitis i s caused by H.virus which is spread 
through blood transfusion by using contaminated syringes and surgical instruments etc. In this 
case also doctors advise us to be careful and avoid the point of contac t.
Vaccination / Immunization
Many diseases such as polio, whooping cough, measles, mumps etc can easily be controlled by 
vaccination or “shots”.191. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Edward Jenner irst developed the technique of vaccination in 1796, c owpox pus is known as vacca 
(from latin vacca=cow). From this word evolved the present term vaccin ation and vaccine. You will 
learn more about vaccination in chapter 6.
Since then, inoculation or vaccination is carried out to make the peopl e immune from viral or 
bacterial epidemics or, for some diseases the individuals are vacc inated in their early life to make 
them immune to those diseases.
It is claimed that small pox has been totally eliminated from the w orld by using this method. 
Scientists are making continuous eforts to develop vaccine against other diseases. Even vaccine 
against AIDS is being administered in humans on experimental b asis.
Drug treatment / Gene therapy
If a person becomes sick with disease, he is subjected to the action of antibiotics  which can kill 
bacteria. The antibiotics are, however, useful in bacterial diseas e and that only when bacteria have 
not developed resistance to antibiotics. In cancer, radiotherapy  and chemotherapy  are also 
used. In radiotherapy, the cancerous part is exposed to short wave ra diations from the radioactive 
material repeatedly at regular intervals. In Pakistan there are severa l centres which are carrying 
out radiotherapy to control cancer. Chemotherapy consists of administr ating certain anticancer  
chemicals to the patients at regular intervals. These chemicals m ay kill both cancerous and normal 
cells.
Recently a new technique has been developed to repair defective genes. This  consists of isolating 
the normal gene and inserting it into the host through bone  marrow c ells. This is called gene 
therapy.
Combating disease utilizing all methods as and when required a nd ensuring a participation of 
community in this programme is known as integrated disease management . This requires 
awareness of the community about the severity of the problem, its causes and its remedies. This 
is a very efective programme for elimination and control of dangerous diseases from the human 
society.
Besides its contribution to food production and health of man, biology  has discovered a number of 
means and developed technologies for the welfare of mankind as for exa mple cloning, protection 
and conservation of environment etc.201. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Cloning : Cloning is a technology for achieving eugenic aims . A clone  is deined as a cell or individual 
and all its asexually produced ofspring. All members of a c lone are genetically identical except 
when a mutation occurs.
Generally no normal animal reproduces naturally by cloning. S everal insects and many plants do, 
in some circumstances whereas few do so regularly.
In 1997 scientists in Scotland succeeded in cloning a sheep. O ther mammalian species (mice and 
cows) have since been cloned. In this procedure the nucleus from a fertilized egg is removed and 
a nucleus from a cell of a fully developed individual is inse rted in its place. The altered zygote is 
then implanted in a suitable womb where it completes its developmen t. The new individual formed 
in this way is a genetically identical clone of the individual  whose nucleus was used. Thus cloning 
could make multiple copies of a desired genotype.
Another type of cloning is the division of a single egg or early embryo into one or more separate 
embryos. This is the same process that normally creates identical twins. Ofspring from this type of 
cloning are genetically identical but carry chromosomes from each  of the two parents. This type of 
cloning has already been used to produce genetically identical ca ttle and other farm animals.
Man is likely to adopt cloning techniques for commercial producti on of valuable animals of known 
pedigree such as horses etc.
At some places scientists are making attempts to clone human embryo which they believe can 
serve as transplant donor. There is a lot of controversy on this issue  as to whether human cloning 
should be attempted or not.
PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF ENVIRONMENT
Industrialization has helped mankind to raise the standard of l iving. It has at the same time 
destroyed our environment. Tons of industrial waste, and eluents in s olid, liquid or gas form are 
being injected into the environment by the industries. These eluents frequ ently contain sizeable 
amount of certain very toxic even carcinogenic materials. Heavy metals like lead from automobiles, 
chromium from tanneries, are playing havoc to human health. Envi ronmental pollution has reached 
alarming level in some countries.211. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1This problem, therefore, needs to be addressed or else it would soon be ou t of control in which 
case the biocomponents of the world ecosystem would sufer irreparable l oss and this environment 
would no longer support life on this planet.
Biology has helped mankind in attracting attention to this problem and the biologists are striving 
to ind the solution to set this environment right wherever it has deteriorated: Biologists have 
already asked for the treatment of industrial eluents to be made obliga tory. Several ways of 
bioremediation (removal or degradation of environmental pollutants or toxic  materials by living 
organisms) are also under investigation. For example algae have been  found to reduce pollution of 
heavy metals by bioabsorption.
Biologists are also working out the list of endangered species  of plants and animals which if not 
protected would soon be extinct. They have, therefore, stressed the needs for th eir protection.
The environmental pollution is a national problem in Pakistan. Ou r rivers, canals are highly polluted 
with the mixing of city sewage and industrial wastes. The life in fresh water of Pakistan is towards 
decline. Fish populations have been most adversely afected. We need to tak e protective measures 
as early as possible. In cities, particularly the exhaust from  automobiles is enormously adding lead 
into the atmosphere. There is then a need for lead free petrol to reduce th e pollution.
        
Animation 11.12 : Protection and Conservatin of Environment
Source & Credit: epd.ntpc221. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 Exercise
                                                                                  
Q.1. Fill in the blanks
(i) ____________________ is the study of organisms in rel ation to their environment.
(ii) The study of organisms living in fresh water bodies like rivers, lakes etc is called  
      ________________________. 
(iii) ______________ is the branch of biology which deals  with the study of social behaviour and   
     communal life of human beings.
(iv) In the ________________ body only six bio-elements accoun ts for 99% of the total mass.
(v) All living things and nonliving things are formed of si mple units called _____________________.
(vi) Various organs in plants and various organ systems in a nimals are assembled together to form
      an ________________________.
(vii) A __________________ is a group of organisms of the same species located in the same place at
       the same time.
(viii) A __________________ is based upon observations.
(ix) A hypothesis is a result of deductive reasoning or it can be the consequence of _____________      
       reasoning.
Q.2. Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’  and write the correct statement 
        if it is false.
(i) Penicillin was discovered by Edward Jenner from a fungu s Penicillium.
(ii) Many diseases such as polio, whooping cough, measles, m umps etc can be controlled by
     antibiotics.231. Introduction eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(iii) Exposure to the small pox virus allows the body to develop immu nity against cowpox virus.
(iv) AIDS is caused by HIV and it spreads through sexual con tacts, blood transfusion, by contaminated
     syringe or surgical instruments.
Q.4. Short questions.
(i)       What do you mean by hypothesis?
(ii)      How does law difer from theory?
(iii)     What is deductive reasoning ?
(iv)     Deine vaccination.
(v)      Write a short note on cloning.
Q.5. Extensive question.
(i)      Deine the following branches of biology:
         Molecular Biology, Microbiology, Marine Biology, Biotec hnology
(ii)     Discuss briely phyletic lineage in biological organ ization.
(iii)    Write notes on the following:
         (a) Living world in space and time
         (b) Population (c) Community
(iv)     Explain the biological method for solving a biological problem. How do deductive and inductive
         reasoning play an important role in it?
(v)     What is the role of the study of Biology in the welfareof ma nkind?