13. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CHAPTER
3 Enzymes
Animation 3.1: Enzyme
Source &Credit: pharmaxchange23. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Enzymes are the most important group of proteins which are biologica lly active. They tremendously 
increase the eiciency of a biochemical reaction and are speciic f or each type of reaction. Without 
these enzymes the reaction would proceed at a very slow speed making li fe impossible.
Enzymes are composed of hundreds of amino acids joined together an d coiled upon themselves 
to form a globular structure. The catalytic activity is restricted to a small portion of the structure 
known as the active site. The reactant called substrate is attached  to the active site consisting of 
only a few amino acids, while rest of the bulk of the amino a cids maintains the globular structure 
of the enzyme.
Some enzymes consist solely of proteins. Others also have a non-protein part known as a co-factor , 
which is essential for the proper functioning of the enzymes. T he cofactor usually acts as “bridge” 
between the enzyme and its substrate, often it contributes directly to the chemical reactions which 
bring about catalysis. Sometimes the co-factor provides a source of chemical energy, helping to 
drive reactions which would otherwise be diicult or impossible. Som e enzymes use metal ions as 
co-factors like Mg2+, Fe2+, Cu2+, Zn2+ etc. The detachable co-factor is known as an activator if it is a n 
inorganic ion (Fig. 3.1).
If the non-protein part is covalently bonded, it is known as a prosthetic group . If it is loosely attached 
to the protein part, it is known as coenzyme . It is closely related to vitamins, which represent the 
essential raw materials from which coenzymes are made. Only sm all quantities of vitamins areFig. 3.1 Substrate molecules will not it correctly at the active centre and there will be no catalytic action unl ess the 
cofactor molecule is also present33. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1needed because, like enzymes, co-enzyme can be used again and again. An enzyme with its coenzyme, 
or prosthetic group, removed is designated as apoenzyme . Adding the correct concentrated 
coenzyme to the apoenzyme will restore enzyme activity. An activated enzy me consisting of 
polypeptide chain and a cofactor is known as holoenzyme.
Many enzymes are simply dissolved in the cytoplasm. Other enzym es are tightly bound to certain 
subcellular organelles. They are produced by living cells for use in or near the site of their production. 
The enzymes important in photosynthesis are found in the chloropla sts and enzymes involved in 
cellular respiration are found in the mitochondria. Some of the en zymes which are involved in the 
synthesis of proteins are integral part of ribosomes.
CHARACTERISTICS OF ENZYMES
Enzymes, the biochemical catalysts possess the following importan t characteristics.
1. All enzymes are globular proteins.
2. They increase the rate of reaction without themselves being used up.
3. Their presence does not afect the nature or properties of end products.
4. Small amounts of an enzyme can accelerate chemical reactions .Animated 3.2: Enzymes 
Source and Credit: dynamicscience43. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.15. They are very speciic in their action; a single enzyme  
     catalyzes only a single chemical reaction or a group               
     of related reactions.
6. They are sensitive to even a minor change in pH,                      
     temperature and substrate concentration.
7. Some enzymes require a co-factor for their proper 
     functioning.
8. They lower the activation energy of the reactions.
MECHANISM OF ENZYME ACTION 
(CATAL YSIS)
An enzyme is a three dimensional globular protein that has specii c chemical composition due to 
its component amino acids and a speciic shape. Every enzyme by virtue of its speciicity recognizes 
and reacts with a special chemical substance called substra te. Any enzyme, therefore, reacts only 
with its speciic substrate and transforms it into product(s). It is then released unaltered and thus 
can be used again and again. 
                    E            +        S            m          ES                 m           E                 +            P 
                    Enzyme          Substrate              Enzyme                         Enzyme                   Product
                                                                           substrate complexSome enzymes are potentially damaging 
if they are manufactured in their active 
form. For example, pepsin  is a powerful 
protein - digesting enzyme and is quite 
capable of destroying cell’s internal 
structure and thus is produced in 
inactive pepsinogen  form by the cell. It 
is converted in its active form only in the 
digestive tract where it is required to be 
active.
Animated 3.3: Catalysis 
Source and Credit: promma.ac.th53. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1
       Fig, 3.2 Enzyme to enzyme chain (association)In certain cases enzymes act in a series of chemical reactions i n a particular order to complete 
a metabolic pathway such as respiration or photosynthesis. The su ccessive enzymes containing 
these reactions are normally present together in a precise order of rea ction such that substrate 
molecules can be literally handed on from one enzyme to another formin g a enzyme to enzyme 
chain. In this way, the products from one step in pathway are transferred to the enzyme catalyzing 
the next step.
Animated 3.4: Enzyme to enzyme chain 
(association)
Source and Credit: faculty.ccbcmd63. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1An enzyme and its substrate react with each other through a deinite c harge-bearing site of an 
enzyme called active site. The charge and shape of the active site is  formed by some amino acids 
present in the polypeptide chain of the active site of the enzyme. Thes e amino acids are brought 
closer and are arranged in a speciic way by coiling and f olding of the polypeptide chain within the 
globular symmetry of the enzyme (Fig. 3.3).
The active site of the enzyme is made up of two deinite regions i.e the bi nding site and the catalytic 
site. The binding site helps the enzyme in the recognition and b inding of a proper substrate to 
produce an ES complex. This reaction activates the catalytic site. A ctivated catalytic site catalyzes 
the transformation of the substrate into product(s). Thus the enzyme a fter catalysis detaches itself 
from the products unchanged. Enzyme requires aqueous medium for  its activity.
Emil Fischer (1890) proposed a Lock and Key model to 
visualize substrate and enzyme interaction. According 
to this model, as one speciic key can open only a 
speciic lock, in the same manner a speciic enzyme can 
transform only one substrate into products(s).
According to Lock and Key Model the active site is a rigid structur e. There is no modiication or 
lexibility in the active site before, during or after the enzyme action and it is used only as a template. 
Later studies did not support this model in all reactions.
Fig. 3.3 Diagrammatic representation of an enzyme-substrate rea ction (Lock and Key
Model)
Most enzymes do not loat about in a kind 
of cytoplasmic soup’ but are attached 
to membrane systems inside the cell 
in speciic and orderly arrangements. 
Mitochondria and chloroplasts are good 
examples of this.73. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1On the basis of new evidences Koshland (1959) proposed its modiied  form. This is known as Induce 
Fit Model. 
He argued that when a substrate combines with an enzyme, it indu ces changes in the enzyme 
structure. The change in structure enables the enzyme to perform i ts catalytic activity more 
efectively.
F ACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF ENZYME ACTION
The functional speciicity of every enzyme is the consequence of its sp eciic chemistry and 
coniguration. Any factor that can alter the chemistry and shape of  an enzyme can afect its rate of 
catalysis. Some of the important factors that can afect the rate of enzy me action are: concentration 
of enzyme, concentration of substrate, temperature, and pH of the mediu m.
1. Enzyme Concentration
The rate of reaction depends directly on the amount of enzyme present at a  speciic time at 
unlimited substrate concentration. If the amount of enzyme is increa sed by two fold the reaction 
rate is doubled. 
By increasing the enzyme molecules an increase in the number  of active sites takes place. More 
active sites will convert the substrate molecules into product(s), in th e given period of time. After a 
certain limiting concentration, the rate of reaction will no longer dep end upon this increase.
2. Substrate Concentration
At low concentration of substrate the reaction rate is directly pr oportional to the substrate available.
If the enzyme concentration is kept constant and the amount of substr ate is increased, a point is 
reached when a further increase in the substrate does not increas e the rate of the reaction any 
more (Fig.3.4). This is because at high substrate level all th e active sites of the enzyme are occupied 
and further increase in the substrate does not increase the reaction r ate.83. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.13. Temperature
The rate of enzyme controlled reaction may increase with increase in temperature but up to a 
certain limit. All enzymes can work at their maximum rate at a speciic temperature called as 
optimum temperature. For enzymes of human body 37°C is the optimu m temperature (Fig.3.5).
Heat provides activation energy and therefore, chemical reactions are a ccelerated at high 
temperatures. Heat also supplies kinetic energy to the reacting molecu les, causing them to move 
rapidly. Thus the reactants move more quickly and chances of th eir collision with each other are 
increased. However, further increase in heat energy also increases the vibrations of atoms which 
make up the enzyme molecule. If the vibrations become too violent, globul ar structure essential for 
enzyme activity is lost and the enzyme is said to be denatured.Fig. 3.4.1 leet o f substrate c oncentration on the rate of an  enzyme catalyzed reaction.93. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.14. pH Value
Every enzyme functions most efectively over a narrow range of pH known as the optimum pH  as 
shown in Table 4.1.
A slight change in pH can change the ionization of the amin o acids at the active site. Moreover, 
it may afect the ionization of the substrates. Under these changed condi tions enzyme activity is 
either retarded or blocked completely. 
Extreme changes in pH cause the bonds in the enzyme to break, resu lting in the enzyme denaturation.
                                   ig.3.5. Efect of temperature on the rate of an enzyme cataly zed reaction103. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 Table 4.1 Optimum pH values for some enzymes
                     Enzyme                   Optimu m pH
                     Pepsin                          2.00
                     Sucrase                          4.50
                     Enterokinase                          5.50
                     Salivary amylase                          6.80
                     Catalase                          7.60
                     Chymotrypsin                                 7.00-8.00
                     Pancreatic lipase                          9.00
                     Arginase                          9.70
Inhibitors
An inhibitor is a chemical substance which can react (in  place of substrate) with the enzyme but 
is not transformed into product(s) and thus blocks the active site temp orarily or permanently, for 
example poisons, like cyanide;, antibiotics, anti-metabolites and some drugs.
Inhibitors can be divided into two types: (i) Irreversible (ii) Rever sible
Irreversible Inhibitors
They check the reaction rate by occupying the active sites or destroyin g the globular structure. 
They occupy the active sites by forming covalent bonds or they may p hysically block the active sites.
Reversible Inhibitors 
They form weak linkages with the enzyme. Their efect can be neutral ized completely or partly by 
an increase in the concentration of the substrate.
They are further divided into two major types: A. Competitive B. Non-com petitive
A. Competitive Inhibitors
Because of the structural similarity with the substrate they may be selected by the binding sites, 
but are not able to activate the catalytic sites. Thus product(s) are n ot formed (Fig.3.6).113. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1B. Non-competitive Inhibitors
They form enzyme inhibitor complex at a point other than the active s ite. They alter the structure 
of the enzyme in such a way that even if genuine substrate binds the active site, catalysis fails to 
take place.
Animated 3.5: Non-competitive Inhibitors
Source and Credit: academic.brooklyn123. Enzymes eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
  Exercise
                                                                  
Q.1.    Fill in the blank.
            (i)     Enzymes are composed of hundreds of____ ________
            (ii)    Some enzymes consist of a non-protein par t known as a _________
            (iii)   Many enzymes require non-protein component called _________ for their proper 
                     functioning.
            (iv)   Enzymes are highly ________ in natur e.
            (v)    The enzymes which carry out the synthes is of _____________ are integral parts of
                    ribosomes.
Q.2.    Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘fal se’ and write the correct statement if it  
            is false.
            (i)     The enzymes important in photosynthesis a re found in tire mitochondria
            (ii)    Large amounts-of an enzyme can accelera te chemical reactions.
            (iii)   Calvin Malvin proposed Lock and Key mod el for enzyme action.
            (iv)   The active site of an enzyme is composed of f our regions.
            (v)    Structure of an enzyme has no speciic imp ortance.
Q.3.    Short Questions
            (i)     List two conditions that destroy enzymatic a ctivity by disrupting bonds between 
                    the atoms in an enzyme.
            (ii)    How do low and high temperature, afect an  enzyme activity?
            (iii)   What is a prosthetic group?
            (iv)   Deine inhibitors of enzyme.
            (v)    How does an enzyme accelerate a metabolic reac tion?
Q.4.    Extensive questions.
            1.     Describe in detail the mechanism of enzy me action. 
            2.     Give the efect of pH and temperature on the eicienc y of an enzyme action.
            3.     Write a note on inhibitors of enzymes.
            4.     What is the importance of enzymes in life?