CHAPTER
12 NUTRITION
Animation.12.1: Nutrition
Source & Credit: wordpress212. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1All organisms need nutrients for the maintenance of their lives. Nutrient  is the food or any substance 
that supplies the body with elements, necessary for metabolism. Certai n nutrients (carbohydrates, 
fats and proteins) provide energy other nutrients (water, electrolytes,  minerals and vitamins) are 
essential to the metabolic process. The sum total of all the processes in volved in the taking in and 
utilization of elements by which growth, repair and maintenanc e of activities in the organism are 
accomplished maintenance of activities in the organism are accom plished is called nutrition .
Organisms can be divided into two classes on the basis of their m ethods of nutrition- autotrophic  
and heterotrophic . Autotrophic organisms can exist in an exclusively inorganic  environment 
because they can manufacture their own organic compounds from the inorganic raw material taken 
from the surrounding media. This means that they produce their own  sugars, lipids, proteins etc. 
from carbon dioxide, water and nitrates. Heterotrophic organisms are incapable of manufacturing 
organic compounds from simple inorganic nutrients and so they ob tain organic molecules from 
the environment in the form of food.
AUTOTROPHIC NUTRITION
See chapter 6 and chapter 11
Mineral nutrition in plants
Generally, all autotrophic or photosynthetic organisms need carbon di oxide and water, which 
supply the carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. These are the predominan t elements, the plant needs for 
the synthesis of organic molecules. There are many other elements that enter into the composition 
of plants. Nitrogen  for example, is present in proteins, phosphorus  is present in ATP, nucleic 
acids and many other important compounds; chlorophyll contains magnesium  and cytochromes 
contain iron . Where does the green plant obtain these elements it needs? Obviously not from 
carbon dioxide and water, but the soil is the main source of these n utrients. These are essential for 
the growth and life of the plant. Crops fail to lourish, if grown  repeatedly in the same ield unless 
soil is replenished with these nutrients. The farmers replace these by spreading animal manure, 
sewage sludge or artiicial fertilizers in measured quantities over the ield. Some chemical fertilizers 
that are commonly used in Pakistan are urea, super phosphates, ammonium nitrate etc.312. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Mineral Element Deiciencies
It is very diicult or not possible to ascertain the efects of individua l minerals in both plants 
and animals. However, the deiciencies of some elements cause serious d iseases showing clear 
symptoms. For example nitrogen deiciency in soil results in the stu nted growth and strong chlorosis  
(lack of chlorophyll) particularly in older leaves. Deiciency of  phosphorus causes stunted growth of 
roots. Soil deicient in potassium causes leaf margins yellow and  brown in colour and premature 
death of the plant. Deiciency of magnesium results in chlorosis. M any economically important 
plant diseases due to mineral deiciency are now catalogued with the help of colour photography, 
enabling rapid diagnosis.
HETEROTROPHIC NUTRITION
METHODS OF PLANT NUTRITION
The plants generally obtain their food from the air or the water i n which they grow. There are, 
however, some special methods of nutrition , which are described below .
Saprophytic Nutrition
Feeding on dead and decaying matter such as dead leaves in th e soil or rotting tree trunks is 
called saprophytic nutrition and derives its nutrients from host pl ants. They produce extracellular 
enzymes, which digest the decaying matter and then absorb the solu ble products back into their 
cells. Some bacteria break down the proteins of dead plants and animals and release nitrates which 
are taken up by the plant roots and then built into new amino acid s and proteins, thus helping in 
nitrogen cycle.
 
Parasitic Nutrition
Feeding by living in or on other organism (host) belonging to difer ent species is called parasitic 
nutrition. Parasites attach themselves to living things or their hos t, for nourishment. For obtaining 
nourishment from higher plant the parasite penetrates its suckers  in the conducting tissue of the 
host. Puccinia is a parasitic fungus that destroys the wheat pl ant. Dodder (Cuscuta)is a lealess 
plant that lives as a twining parasite.412. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Symbiotic Nutrition
It is a mutual nutrition between organisms living in association with one another. These organisms 
belong to two diferent species. Some important examples are lichens, my corrhiza and root nodules 
with nitrogen ixing bacteria. The lichen  is made up of a fungus and alga cells. The alga makes 
food by photosynthesis, while the fungus supplies water and min erals and also protection against 
desiccation (Fig. 12.1). Mycorrhiza  is an association between a fungus and roots of higher plants. 
The fungus depends upon the photosynthate of the plant. The beneit derived  by mycorrhiza plant 
is not properly understood. However, it is known that the 
plants with mycorrhiza association show better growth 
than those without fungal partner. Leguminous plants  
have nodules on their roots, which contain nitrogen ixing 
bacteria (Fig. 12.2). The bacteria live on the plant material 
and ix nitrogen,  converting it into nitrates, which the 
plant uses.
Nutrition in insectivorous plants. There are a few plants that supplement their inorganic diet 
with organic compounds. These organic compounds are obtained by  trapping and digesting insects 
and small animals. All of the insectivorous plants are true autotr ophs, but when they capture prey, 
their growth becomes rapid. Apparently, nitrogenous compounds of an imal body are of beneit 
to these plants. In some plants, the trapped insects are decomposed by  bacteria. In others the 
trapped insects are digested by enzymes secreted by the leaves. The pla nts absorb the nitrogenous 
compounds thus formed.Possibly the Mycorrhizal fungus 
beneits the plant by decomposing 
organic material in the soil and 
providing water and minerals such as 
phosphorous to plant.
Fig. 12.1. Lichens. Fig. 12.2. Nodules on leguminous plant roots.512. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Pitcher plant  (Sarracenia pupurea ) has leaves modiied into a sac or a pitcher, partly illed with 
water (Fig. 12.3). The end of the leaf is modiied to form a hood, which partly covers the open 
mouth of the pitcher. Small insects that fall into the pitcher are prevented from climbing out by 
numerous stif hairs. The proteins of trapped insects are decomposed by bacteria or enzymes and 
the products of this decay are absorbed by the inner surface of th e pitcher leaf.
Venus-ly trap  (Dionaea muscipula ) The leaf is bilobed with midrib between them. There is a 
row of long stif bristles along the margins of each lobe. When an  insect touches small sensitive 
hairs on the surface of the leaf, the lobes quickly come together with their bristles interlocked. The 
trapped insect is then digested by the enzymes secreted from the glan ds on the leaf surface and 
the products are then absorbed (Fig. 12.4).
Fig.12.3 Pitcher plant (Saracenia pupurea). several fruit lies are entrapped within the leaf.612. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                            Fig. 12. 4 Leaf of Venus ly trap ( Dionaea muscipula) (a) Fly is a bout to trigger the hair.
                                                          (b) The two halves of the leaf trapping the ly.
Sundew  (Drosera intermedia ) shows another type of modiication of leaf for insectivorous activity 
(Fig. 12.5). The tiny leaves bear numerous hair like tentacles , each with a gland at its tip. The insects, 
attracted by the plant’s odour are entagled. As in the above mentioned example, in sundew also 
the proteins of insects are digested by enzymes and the products are a bsorbed.
Fig. 12.5 Leaf of Sundew (Drosera intermedia) A dragonly is cau ght in the sticky luid on the ends on the leaf of the glan dular hair.712. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Methods of Animal Nutrition
In large animals, every cell of the body needs nourishment, yet most cells cannot leave their position 
in the body and travel to a food source, so the food must be delivered. T he digestive system provides 
the body with water, electrolytes, and other nutrients. To do this, di gestive system is specialized to 
ingest food; propel it through the digestive tract; digest the food; a nd absorb water; electrolytes 
and other nutrients from the lumen of the digestive tract. Undigested ma tter from the food is 
moved out of the digestive tract. 
Animals exhibit more variety of nutrition as compared to the plants . On the basis of nutrition 
animals may be classiied as:
Detritivores: The animals which feed on detritus (organic debris from decompos ing plants and 
animals) are called detritivores. Earthworm is the common example of detritus feeder. It ingests 
fragments of decaying organic matter especially vegetation either at th e soil surface or during 
burrowing activity.
Herbivores:  Animals that feed on plants are called herbivores. Typical herb ivores include insects, 
reptiles, birds and mammals. Two important groups of herbivorous  mammals are rodents and 
ungulates. The later are hoofed grazing animals, such as hor ses, cattle and sheep. In herbivorous 
mammals the premolars and molars have large grinding surfac es. There is a large gap between 
the incisors and premolars. Canines are missing. In grazin g and browsing herbivores, i.e. deer and 
sheep, there are no upper incisors.
Carnivores:  Animals which feed on other animals are called carnivores. Th ey have large canine 
teeth for catching and tearing the prey. Incisors , premolars a nd molars are all adapted for cutting
lesh, cracking bones and reducing the chunks to sizes suitabl e for swallowing. Cats, dogs, lions 
and tigers are common examples of carnivores. A 
predator is an animal, which captures and readily 
kills live animal for its food. The animal, which is 
eaten, is the prey.
 
Omnivores:  These are the animals which eat both plant and animal food. Example of omnivores 
are crows, rats, red fox, bears, pigs and man. They have the teeth  structurally and functionally 
intermediate between the extremes of specialization attained by the teeth of her bivores and 
carnivores.The predator-prey interaction helps in maintaining 
ecosystem stable. A species in the area without its na tural 
predator leads to disastrous results. The introduction of 
rabbits into Australia without the predator multiplied to 
enormous number and proved a menace to the farmers.812. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Filter feeders:  Many aquatic animals ilter the water and digest the particles th at they extract 
from it. 
A common mussel possesses two large gills covered with cilia. The movement of cilia causes a 
current of water to enter animal via an inhalent siphon (Fig. 1 2.6). The water, which enters, contains 
the food, such as microscopic algae and protozoa. Secretory cells s cattered among cilia produce 
sticky mucus which entangles food particles. The trapped food p articles are then swept towards 
the mouth by the ciliary movement. Certain types of whales are also il ter feeder.
Fig. 12.6 Filter feeding in mussel
Fluid feeders:  When the food is ingested in liquid form the animals are classed  as luid feeders. 
Aphids and mosquitoes are the examples. Aphids suck the phloem j uices out of the green stems 
by inserting their delicate stylets. The female mosquito is also a l uid feeder because it sucks blood 
from the skin capillaries by piercing the skin with the help of  tubular mouth parts.
Macrophagous feeders:  Animals, which take in food in the form of large pieces, are  
macrophagous feeders. Tentacular feeding, scraping and sei zing prey are the common methods of 
macrophagous feeding. Feeding in Hydra is the example of tenta cular feeding.
Scraping type of feeding occurs in the garden snail (Helix) . It feeds by using rasping organ, the 
radula. Leaves are held by the lips of the snail. The radul a moves back and forth over the leaves912. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1with its teeth scraping the food. In this way tiny fragments of leaves are obtained which are gradually 
pushed backward towards the pharynx. Seizing and swallow ing type of macrophagous feeding is 
found in spotted dogish.
Parasitic Nutrition
A parasite  is an organism that lives upon or within another organism, ca lled the host, for obtaining 
its food. A parasite that lives upon the host is an ectoparasite and that which lives within the host is 
an endoparasite . If an organism lives parasitically at all times, it is sa id to be an obligate parasite. 
Facultative parasites  are capable of living independently of its host at times.
Flea and lice are ectoparasites that live in the fur or feafhers of mammals and birds and suck blood 
from their skin. Ticks and mites are common ectoparasites in non- human mammals. In plants, 
aphid is a parasite that sucks food from leaves or stems.
Leech is another common example of ectoparasite attacking both aquatic and terrestrial animals.
Endoparasites also occur in both aquatic and terrestrial animal s. These parasites are most commonly 
found in the intestine of vertebrate host, including man, where they absorb host’s digested food. 
Entamoeba histolytica , tape worm and round worms are common examples of endoparasites.  In 
certain cases the host may be weakened by the presence of parasite or its metabolism may be 
upset by the excretory products of parasite.
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
All animals have similar requirements, although these requirements  difer in detail. Animals must 
have the supply of water, oxygen, simple sugars, amino acids , fatty acids, vitamins and many other 
inorganic and organic substances. These substances, except oxyg en and water, are rare in the 
natural environment and are not directly available to the organisms.  In nature these substances are 
available in the form of proteins, starches, fats, vitamins and m inerals. As such, these moleculesr 
except vitamins and minerals are of no use unless they are brok en down or digested into simple 
molecules such as amino acids, sugars and fatty acids so th at they many pass through the cell 
membrane and be used by the body. The characteristic processes  involved in holozoic nutrition 
are deined as1012. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(a)   Ingestion  taking in of complex food. 
(b) Digestion-  the breakdown of complex organic compounds of food into simpler di fusible 
molecules by the action of enzymes e.g. proteins (meat, ish, eggs etc. ) into amino acids. Digestion 
may be either Intracellular or extracellular . In intracellular, break down of food occurs within the 
cells. In extracellular digestion, enzymes are secreted outside the ce ll into the gut cavity or lumen 
where then digestion takes place. 
(c) Absorption  is the uptake of the difusible food molecules from the digestive region across the 
membrane in to the cell or into the blood stream.
(d) Assimilation  is the utilization of the products of digestion for production of energ y or 
synthesis of cellular material.
(e) Egestionis  the elimination of undigested matter from the body. 
Animation 12.2: Digestion and Absorption
Source and Credit: infogr.am1112. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Digestion in Amoeba
Amoeba proteus  has intracellular mode of digestion and feeds on many kinds of tiny organisms 
which live with it in fresh water ponds and shallow lakes. Amoeba  also feeds on particulate organic 
matter. Food may be ingested at any points on the surface of the bod y. When Amoeba  comes in 
contact with food particle, it immediately puts out pseudopodia around  it. These pseudopodia fuse 
together around the food particle forming the food vacuole (Fig. 12.7) . If the food particle is too 
big, such as Paramecium, Amoeba  encircles it, thus forming a large food vacuole. The food vacuole 
undergoes many changes as digestion proceeds. First it grows sma ller, then larger and again 
smaller. Lysosomes, which contain hydrolytic enzymes, fuse with  the food vacuole and enzymes 
are secreted into it. The irst phase of digestion is killing and s oftening of food that take place 
in the acidic medium (approximately pH 5.6) and later it becom es alkaline (about pH 7.3) during 
which digestion is completed. When digestion is complete in food vac uole membrane is drawn 
into numerous ine canals. The products of digestion are passed in to the canals and inally into 
the surrounding cytoplasm and subsequently utilized in various metabolic reactions of the animal. 
Undigested matter is voided from the organism in the surrounding wa ter by egestion at any point 
of its surface (Fig. 12.8).
Fig. 12.7 Amoeba ingesting food by pseudopodia1212. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                      
                                                    
                       
                                                                           
                                                               Fig. 12.8. Ingestion, digestion and absorption in Amoeba 
Digestion in Hydra
Hydra  is an aquatic, diploblastic cnidarian. it has vase-like b ody composed of two principal layers of 
cells. The central cavity of the body functions as a digestive c avity. The animal has only one opening 
to the outside called mouth which is surrounded by mobile tentacles.  The digestive cavity of this 
sort is called gastrovascular cavity or coelenteron  (Fig. 12.9a).
Animation 12.3: hydra
Source and Credit: gifsoup1312. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 12.9. Hydra: (a) Longitudinal section showing the det ail of wall and the gastrovascular cavity (b) neniatocysts  (discharged and 
un-discharged)
Embedded in the tentacles are numerous stinging cells called nematocysts . Each nematocyst 
consists of a hollow thread coiled within a capsule and a tiny hair-like trigger, projecting outside 
(Fig. 12.9 b). 
When a prey such as Daphnia  or Cyclops  comes in contact with the cnidocil the hollow thread of the 
nematocyst turns inside out, ejects poison and the prey is paralysed  or some times killed. Hydra  
then grasps its prey with its tentacles and pushes it into the diges tive cavity through open mouth. 
The glandular cells in the gastrodermis secrete enzymes which s tart extracellular digestion. 
Gastrodermal lagellate cells and contraction of body cavity help in mixing food with enzymes 
and breaking up into ine particles. These ine particles are then engulfed by phagocytic action of 
gastrodermal cells where digestion is completed intracellularly in  the digestive vacuoles. Indigestible 
food is expelled out from the gastrovascular cavity via mouth. Suc h a digestive system is called sac-
like digestive system having a common opening for ingestion and egesti on.1412. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Digestion in Planaria
Planaria  is free-living, latworm found in fresh water streams and ponds . There is a single gut opening, 
the mouth which is located on the ventral surface near the middle of th e animal. The mouth opens 
into a muscular tubular pharynx, which leads into the intesti ne. The intestine then immediately 
divides into three branches - an anterior one, extending forward an d two lateral branches. Each 
of these main branches gives of numerous small branches which end blindly called caecae (Fig. 
12.10).Animation 12.4: Hydra
Source and Credit: carnivoraforum
Animation 12.5: Planaria
Source and Credit: gifsoup1512. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 12.10. Planaria showing much branched gastrovascular ca vity and extruded pharynx.
Planaria  engulfs the prey by protruding eversible pharynx through the mou th and pushes it into 
the gastrovascular cavity. Food is then digested in the intestine. Enz ymes are secreted by the gland 
cells of the intestine and continue the process of extracellular diges tion. Small particles of food are 
inally engulfed by phagocytic cells. Digestion is completed intra cellularly, from where the products 
of digestion pass to the rest of the body ,by the process of difusion. Branched intestine also 
facilitates difusion of materials in to body cells. Undigested food is egested through the mouth.
Digestion in Cockroach
The digestive system of cockroach is of tubular type. It can be divi ded into fore, mid and hind gut. 
The foregut includes mouth cavity, pharynx, crop and gizzard.  A pair of salivary glands is present in 
the thorax region of the animal. They secrete saliva, which is pour ed into the mouth cavity. The mid 
gut is a short narrow tube called mesenteron stomach . Short inger like hollow tubes, the hepatic 
caecae  open into the anterior end of the midgut.
The hind gut is a long coiled tube, the terminal part of which is a thick walled chamber, the rectum , 
which opens to the exterior through anus (Fig. 12.11).1612. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1            
  Fig. 12.11. Cockroach digestive system
The cockroach feeds on all types of food. After cutting the food into s mall pieces with the help of 
mandibles, it is mixed up with saliva in the mouth cavity. Th e digestive enzymes of saliva hydrolyse 
the starchy matter contained in food. The partly digested food is stor ed in the crop . Food leaves the 
crop chunk by chunk and after being ground in the gizzard  it moves into the midgut. The enzymatic 
secretions of hepatic caecae and midgut digest the food completely. T he indigestible food after 
temporary storage in the rectum , as fecal matter is then egested out through anus.1712. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Cockroach has a tubular digestive system having mouth for ingesti on and anus or cloacal aperture 
for egestion. It is more eicient system than sac like digestive system h aving specialized organs or 
partitions for eicient digestion and absorption of food.
                                             
                                                 
 Animation 12.6: Cockroach
Source and Credit: tumblr1812. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
Digestion in Man  
The digestive system  of man consists of a long coiled tube that extends from the mouth to the 
anus. The main parts in the direction of passage of food, are the oral or buccal cavity, esophagus, 
stomach, small intestine  (duodenum, jejunum and ileum), large intestine (ascen ding colon, 
transverse colon, descending colon, caecum and rectum).  (Fig. 12.12) Associated with the 
various regions are the glands, especially salivary glands, liver  and pancreas . There are three 
sites of digestion in the digestive system of man - oral cavity, stoma ch and small intestine.
 Fig. 12.12 The digestive system of man.
Digestion in Oral Cavity  There are several functions of the oral cavity, the most obvious being 
the (a) selection of food,  (b) grinding or mastication (c) lubrication and (d) digestion. 
Selection of food:  When food enters the oral cavity (the cavity bounded by palate, tongue,  teeth 
and cheeks) it is tasted, smelled and felt. If the taste or smell is  unpleasant or if hard objects like1912. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1bone or dirt are present in the food, it is rejected. Oral cavity is a ided in selection by the senses of 
smell, taste and sight. Tongue being sensory and muscular orga n plays the most important role in 
selection of food through its taste buds.
Grinding or mastication:  After selection, the food is ground by means of molar teeth into 
smaller pieces. This is useful because : (a) the esophagus al lows relatively small pieces to pass 
through and (b) small pieces have much more surface for the enzyme to attack. 
Lubrication and digestion:  These are the main functions of the oral cavity accomplished by 
saliva. Saliva is secreted by three pairs of salivary glands  namely sublingual  glands situated below 
the tongue; submaxillary  glands behind the jaws and parotid glands  in front of the ears. Saliva 
produced by these glands contains three important ingredients.
i) Water and mucus,    ii) Sodium bicarbonate and some other salts,   iii) Carbohydrate digesting 
enzymes, amylase or ptyalin.
Water and mucus together make a slimy liquid which serves to mois ten and lubricate the food so 
that it can be chewed eiciently and passed through the esophagus sm oothly.
Sodium bicarbonate and some other salts are slightly antiseptic bu t their main function is to stablilze 
the pH of food. Fresh saliva is alkaline with a pH nearly 8, quickly loses carbon dioxide and gets to 
pH 6. Ptyalin is a carbohydrate - digesting enzyme, which d igests starch and glycogen to maltose.
Swallowing:  As a result of mastication, the softened, partly digested, slimy food mass is rolled 
into small oval lump called bolus , which is then pushed to the back of the mouth by the action of 
tongue and muscles of phaynx which ensure that the food does not enter  the windpipe. Following 
are the events which occur during swallowing:
i)      the tongue moves upwards and backwards against the roof of the mouth,  forcing the bolus to 
        the back of the mouth cavity.
ii)      The backward movement of the tongue pushes the soft palate up and closes the nasal opening 
        at the back. At the same time the tongue forces the epiglottis (a  lap of cartilage) into more or  
        less horizontal position thus closing the opening of the wi ndpipe (the glottis).2012. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                              
Fig, 12.13 Swallowing in man
iii)   The larynx, cartilage round the top of the windpipe moves upw ard under the back of the tongue.
iv)  The glottis is partly closed by the contraction of a ring of mus cle.
v)   The food does not enter the partly open glottis, because the epiglottis diver ts the food mass to 
        one side of the opening and safely down the esophagus. T he beginning of the swallowing action 
        is voluntary, but once the food reaches the back of the m outh, swallowing becomes automatic. 
      The food is then forced down the esophagus by peristalsis (Fig. 12.13). 
Peristalsis These are characteristic movements of the digestive tract by which f ood is moved along 
the cavity of the canal. It consists of the wave of contraction of the cir cular and  longitudinal  muscles 
preceded by the wave of relaxation thus squeezing the food down along th e canal. Peristalsis starts 
just behind the mass of food from the buccal cavity along the esopha gus to the stomach and then 
along the whole alimentary canal (Fig. 12.14). Occasionally , the movements are reversed, with the 
result food may be passed from the intestine back into the stomach and  even into the mouth. 
This movement is called antiperistalsis,  leading to vomiting. Hunger contractions are peristaltic 
contractions which are increased by low blood glucose levels and a re suiciently strong to create 
an uncomfortable sensation often called a “hunger pang”. Hunger  pangs usually begin 12 to 24 
hours after the previous meal or in less time for some people.2112. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 12.14 Diferent stages of
peristaltic movement in the
esophagus.
Digestion in stomach
At the junction between esophagus and the stomach there is a special r ing of muscles called cardiac 
sphincter . When the sphincter muscles contract, the entrance to the stomach closes  and thus 
prevents the contents of the stomach from moving back into the esophagus ( Fig. 12.15a). It opens 
when a wave of peristalsis coming down the esophagus reaches it. 
The stomach is situated below the diaphragm on the left side of th e abdominal cavity. It is an elastic 
muscular bag that stores food from meals for some time, making di scontinuous feeding possible. 
It also partly digests the food.Gravity assist the movement of 
material through the esophagus, 
especially when liquids are 
swallowed. However, the peristaltic 
contractions that move material 
through the esophagus are 
suiciently forceful to allow a 
person to swallow, even while doing 
a headstand.2212. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                                                         
Fig. 12.15 (a) Sagittal section of human stomach showing in ternal ridges and sphincters.
   (b) Section through stomach wall             (c) Detai l of gastric gland in the stomach wallHeart burn , or Pyrosis , is a 
painful burning sensation in the 
chest usually associated with the 
back lush of acidic chyme into 
the esophagus. This is due to 
overeating, eating fatty food, lying 
down immediately after a meal, 
consuming too much alcohol, 
cafeine or smoking.2312. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1           
The stomach wall is composed of three principal layers: an outer layer of connective tissue; middle 
layer of smooth muscles and inner layer (mucosa) of connective tis sue with many glands. The 
middle layer of muscles consists of outer longitudinal and in ner circular muscles (Fig. 12.15 b). 
These muscular layers help in churning and mixing the f ood with the stomach secretions. The 
mucosa of the stomach possesses numerous tubular gastric glands ,which are composed of three 
kinds of cells;
a) mucous cells,  that secrete mucus, b) parietal or oxyntic 
cells  secrete hydrochloric acid and c)  zymogen cells, 
which secrete pepsinogen  (Fig. 12.15c). The secretion 
of all these cells is collectively called gastric juice. The 
secretion of the gastric juice is regulated by smell, sight 
and quality of food.
Mucus is a thick secretion that covers the inside of the stomach. It p revents the underlying walls 
from being digested.
Hydrochloric acid is secreted in concentrated form. It adjusts the pH of stomach contents ranging 
from 2-3 for the pepsin to act on proteins. It also softens the food and  kills many microorganisms 
taken in along with the food. Animation 12.7: Stomach Digestion
Source and Credit: gifsoup
If more protein is present in the food it stimulates 
the production of gastrin hormone from the gastric 
endocrine lining, which is carried by blood to the 
gastric glands and stimulates them to produce 
more gastric juice. Thus more proteins more 
gastrin and more gastric juice for digestion.2412. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Pepsin is an enzyme secreted in an inactive form called pepsinogen. P epsinogen is activated to 
pepsin when exposed to the acidic medium or to some already activated pepsin. Pepsin hydrolyzes 
protein to yield peptones and polypeptides. 
The muscles of stomach wall thoroughly mix up the food with gastr ic juice and eventually convert it 
to semi-solid mass called chyme.  Gradually the stomach empties into the duodenum through the 
relaxed pyloric sphincter.
Digestion in small intestine 
Small intestine in man consists of duodenum, jejunum and ileum . Duodenum is about 20-25 cm 
long, which leads into jejunum and then 
ileum. When chyme passes from stomach 
into duodenum, its acidity stimulates the 
release of secretions from pancreas, liver 
and duodenal cells.
Pancreas  is a large gland whose exocrine tissue secretes a juice that lows th rough pancreatic duct 
into the duodenum. Included in this juice are enzymes that digest a ll principal components of food 
i.e. carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Carbohydrate- digesting enzyme is pancreatic amylase  also 
called amylopsin, which digests starch into maltose. Fat digesti ng enzyme is lipase , that hydrolyzes 
a small percentage of fats into fatty acids and glycerol. Lik e pepsin, trypsin is also secreted as 
inactive trypsinogen, which is activated by enterokinase, an enzyme secreted by the lining of the 
duodenum. Hepatic and Pancreatic secretions are also stimulated by  a hormone 
called secretin, which is produced by the intestinal m ucosa on the entry 
of acidic food from stomach. The acidity stimulates secretin production 
in duodenum and secretin is carried by blood to pancreas wh ich is 
stimulated to produce pancreatic juice. Secretin also inh ibits gastric 
secretion.
Animation 12.8: Pancreas
Source and Credit: gifsoup2512. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Trypsin  splits proteins into peptones and polypeptides. Pancreatic juice als o contains sodium 
bicarbonate, which partly neutralizes the chyme coming from th e stomach. This is necessary 
because enzymes of the pancreas do not work well in acid conditions .
Liver  secretes bile, which may be temporarily stored in the gall bladd er and released into the 
duodenum through the bile duct. The bile is green, watery luid. I t contains no enzymes, but its 
green colour is due to the bile pigments, which are formed from th e breakdown of hemoglobin in 
the liver. The bile also contains bile salts, which act on fats, and emulsiies them. It means that they 
break them up into small globules, which are then easily digested  by water-soluble lipase.
If bile pigments are prevented from leaving digestive 
tract, they may accumulate in blood, causing a 
condition known as jaundice.  Cholesterol, secreted 
by the liver, may precipitate in the gall bladder to 
produce gall stones , which may block release of 
bile.Animation 12.9: Digestion in small intestine
Source and Credit: makeagif
The liver is easily ruptured because it is large, ixed in  
position, and fragile or it may lacerate by a broken rib. 
Liver rupture or laceration may result in severe internal 
bleeding. The liver may become enlarged as a result of heart  
malfunctioning, hepatic cancer or may be damaged due to 
hepatitis or being alcoholic.2612. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                                                       
Jejunum  is the second portion of the small intestine extending from the duodenu m to the ileum. 
It is about 2.4 meter in length comprising about two ifth of the sma ll intestine. Lower three ifth of 
the small intestine from jejunum is the ileum. 
The food, which escapes undigested from the duodenum, is completely digested in the jejunum 
and ileum by a group of enzymes contained in the intestinal juic e. The overall picture of enzymes in 
the human digestive system, their substrates and inal products is as follows.
Enzymes Substrates Products
Amino peptidase polypeptides dipeptides
Erypsin dipeptides amino acids
Lipase fats fatty acids and glycerol
Maltase maltose glucose
Lactase lactose glucose and galactose
Absorption of food
As we know that small intestine consists of duodenum, jejunum and  ileum. Nearly all absorption 
of the products of digestion takes place in the ileum. The internal surface of ileum has many folds, 
which exhibit velvety appearance due to the presence of numerous inger-l ike outgrowths called 
villi ( Fig. 12.17 a & b). Each villus is richly supplied w ith blood capillaries and a vessel called lacteal 
of lymphatic system with a covering of epithelial cells. Electron m icroscope reveals that these cells 
have countless, closely packed cylindrical processes, microvilli  (Fig. 12.17 c). The total area of 
absorption becomes incredibly large due to the enfolding, villi a nd microvilli. Simple Sugars and 
amino acids are absorbed by difusion or active transport into the b lood capillaries through the 
microvilli. Some of the fatty acids and glycerol are also absorbed  into blood stream. However, a 
large proportion of fatty acids and glycerol enter the epithelial cell s of villi, where they recombine 
into fats. These fats then enter the lacteals. Proteins present in ly mph vessels combine with fat 
molecules to form lipoprotein droplets. These pass 
into blood stream via thoracic lymphatic duct. The lipo-
proteins are subsequently hydrolysed by blood plasma 
enzyme and enter body cells, where they may be used 
in respiration or stored as fat in the liver, muscle of 
under the skin.Many humans develop intestinal gas and diarrhoea 
from consuming milk product, because they lack the 
enzymes for digesting lactose in milk. The epithelial 
cells of villi are constantly shed into intestine. These  
cells are replaced by the new cells moving up due to 
rapid cell division in crypts (Fig. 12.17)2712. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                       
Fig. 12.17. (a) Part of wall of small intestine showing glan ds and vilii.
                                                                                    (b) Detail of villus structure.
Animation 12.10: Digestion of food
Source and Credit: sciproject-1-42812. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The intestinal contents are pushed along the alimentary canal by  normal peristaltic activity. At the 
end of ileum, there is an ileocolic sphincter that opens and clos es time to time to allow a small 
amount of residue from the ileum to enter the large intestine.
Large intestine :  The large intestine is composed of a caecum, colon and rectum. Caec um is a 
blind sac that projects from the large intestine between ileum and col on. From the blind end of the 
caecum there arises a inger like process called appendix.  The appendix, some times gets inlamed 
due to entrapping and then puriication of food causing appendicitis,  which has to be removed 
surgically in many instances. Animation 12.11: Absorption of 
food
Source and Credit: askiitians2912. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The material that passes from the small intestine to the large intestine contains a large amount 
of water, dissolved salts and undigested material. Water and sal ts are absorbed into blood, while 
undigested material is rejected as feces. The fecal matter contains a  large number of bacteria, plant 
ibers, slouged of mucosal cells, mucus, cholesterol, bile pigmen ts and water. Large intestine also 
harbors a large population of useful bacteria that synthesize some vitamins especially vitamin K, 
which are absorbed in blood. If the absorption of water and sal ts does not take place due to infection, 
drug action or emotional disturbance, a condition known as diarrhoea occurs. If this condtion 
is unchecked, dehydration develops that may prove to be fatal. The oth er extreme condition is 
constipation , which is caused by the excessive absorption of water.
    
Rectum  is the last part of large intestine, where feces are temporarily stored  and rejected through 
anus, at intervals. Anus is surrounded by two sphincters, the i nternal is of smooth and outer of 
striped muscles. Under normal condtions, as the rectum is illed u p with feces, it gives rise to 
defecation relex. This relex can be consciously inhibited in ind ividuals other than infants. Gradually 
the child learns to bring this relex under control.
Animation 12.12: large Intestine
Source and Credit: makeagif3012. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                            Table 12 .1 Functions of The Digestive Organs
Organ Function Secretion
Oral Cavity
Teeth
Lips and cheeks
TongueMastication (cutting and 
grinding of food); 
communication.
Manipulation of food; hold food 
in position between the teeth;
communication.
Manipulation of food; holds 
food in position between the 
teeth; cleansing teeth; tasteNone
Saliva from buccal glands 
(mucus only).
Some mucus; small amount of 
serous luid.
Salivary Glands
Parotid gland
Submandibular
glands
Sublingual glandsSecretion of saliva through 
ducts to posterior portions of 
oraI cavity.
Secretion of saliva in loor of 
oral cavity.
Secretion of saliva in loor of 
oral cavity.Saliva with amylase
Saliva, with amylase
mucus
Saliva with mucus only.
Pharynx swallowing Some mucus
Esophagus Movement of food by peristalsis 
from pharynx to stomachMucus
Stomach  
Mucous cells
Parietal cells
Zymogen cells
Endocrine cellsMechanical mixing of food;
enzymatic digestion; storage;
absorption.
Protection of stomach wall by 
mucus production
Decrease in stomach pH.
Protein digestion.
Regulation of secretion and 
motility.Mucus
Hydrochloric acid.
Pepsinogen
Gastrin3112. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Accessory Glands
Liver
Gallbladder
PancreasSecretion of bile into duodenum
Bile storage; absorbs water and
electrolytes to concentrate bile.
Secretion of several digestive
enzymes and bicarbonate ions 
into duodenum.Bile
No secretions of its
own, stores and
concentrates bile.
Trypsin, chymotrypsin, 
pancreatic amylase, pancreatic 
lipase, bicarbonate ions.
Small Intestine
Duodenal glands
Goblet cells
Absorptive cells
Endocrine cellsProtection
Protection
Secretion of digestive enzymes 
and absorption of digested 
materials.
Regulation of secretion and 
motility.Mucus
Mucus
Enterokinase, amylase,
peptidases, sucrase,
maltase,
lactase, lipase.
Gastrin, secretin,
Large intestine
Goblet cells Absorption, storage, and food
movement.
ProtectionMucus
SOME COMMON DISEASES RELATED TO NUTRITION 
Dyspepsia  
Incomplete or imperfect digestion is called dyspepsia . This is not a disease in itself but symptomatic 
of other disorders or diseases. This is characterized by abdomin al discomfort, latulence, heartburn, 
nausea and vomiting. These symptoms may occur irregularly and  in diferent patterns from time to 
time. Dyspepsia may occur due to excessive acidity in stomach or f aulty function of stomach and 
intestine or insuicient quality or quantity of bile secretions.3212. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Food poisoning  
This term indicates an illness from indigestion of food containi ng toxic substances. One of the 
commonest causes of food poisoning are the toxins produced by bacteria , Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. These bacteria live in the intestines of cattle, chi cken and duck without causing 
disease symptoms. Humans, however, may develop food poisoning if th ey drink milk, eat meat or 
eggs which are contaminated with these bacteria. The symptoms of f ood poisoning are diarrhoea, 
vomiting and abdominal pain. They occur from 12-24 hours af ter eating contaminated food. 
Infection is most likely, if unpasteurized milk is drunk or i f meat is not properly cooked. 
The liquid that escapes during defrosting frozen meat contains Sa lmonella bacteria. The dishes and 
utensils while the meat is defrosting must not be allowed to come in contact with any other food. 
A severe form of food poisoning is botulism . This is caused by toxins produced by bacteria known as 
Clostridium botulinum . Botulism develops by the use of improperly canned or otherwise preser ved 
foods, especially meat. The toxin produced by these bacteria is very  powerful and has selective 
action on central nervous system, causing cardiac and respirator y paralysis. The early symptoms 
of this diseases are fatigue, dizziness, double vision, headache,  nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and 
abdominal pain.
Obesity
It is the term employed when a person has abnormal amount of fat on  the body. If one eats too 
much food than body requirement, the surplus is stored as fat so b ecomes overweight or obese . 
There is fat stored in adipose tissue  in the abdomen, around the kidneys and under the skin. 
Certain cells accumulate drops of fat in their cytoplasm. As thes e drops increase in size and number, 
they join together to form one large globule of fat in the middle of the cel l, pushing the cytoplasm 
into thin layer and the nucleus to one side. Groups of fat cells for m adipose tissue. Some people 
never seem to get fat no matter how much they eat, while others lay down fa t when their intake 
only just exceeds their need. The explanation probably lies in the b alance of hormones which, to 
some extent, is determined by heredity. An obese person is much more li kely to sufer from high 
blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, stomach disorder th an a person who has normal 
body weight.
Anorexia Nervosa  
This term is employed to the loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming obese. Such a feeling is 
common in human females between the age of 12 and 21 years. Fe ar does not diminish even when 
weight is dropped to dangerous level. Psychiatric therapy is usua lly required when patient refuses 
to eat.3312. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Anorexia is an illness which largely afects girls usually  just after the onset of puberty. The illness 
is characterized by the loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming ob ese. An anorexic girl over 
estimates the size of her own body and so insists that she is over weig ht when in reality her weight 
has dropped to a dangerous level. These girls are often immature ps ychologically and unable to cope 
with the challenges of puberty and their emerging sexuality. The l oss of feminine characteristics 
enable the girls to retreat into a child like state in which they feel  safe. Psychiatric therapy is usually 
required to treat anorexic girls. Such patients are fed through any  route other than alimentary 
canal that is intramuscularly or intravenously. The recovery is very slow. It may take 2-4 years and 
in some cases longer.
Bulimia Nervosa  
It is neurotic disorder in slightly older girls. It is charac terized by bouts of over eating fattening 
food such as fried food or cream cakes. This voracious eating i s followed immediately by self-
induced vomiting, fasting or purgatives. The frequent vomiting and purging may cause physical 
efects including serum electrolyte  imbalance and frequent recurring infections. Treatment of 
bulimics is likely to be prolonged. The initial treatment is to overcom e the efects of weight loss and 
malnutrition. It is necessary to undertake the treatment in hospital under strict supervision.
 
Piles  
Piles or hemorrhoids are masses of dilated, tortuous veins in the anor ectal mucosa. These masses 
may some times start bleeding during bowel movements. Situation may aggravate when the patient 
sufers from constipation. The urge to defecate is depressed and it bec omes diicult to expel the 
faeces. This may cause other symptoms of ill health because of the physical distension of the-
rectum. The only therapy required is the improvement of the hygiene and  the use of food softeners, 
such as roughage, in food or laxatives. The patients are advised not to sit on hard seats. Depending 
on severity of the symptoms, sometimes the hemorrhoids have to be removed surgi cally
Ulcer
The inner wall of digestive tract is normally covered with mucus,  which protects it from enzymes. 
When the mucus layer breaks down the digestive enzymes begin to ea t away the walls of stomach 
or duodenum. This results in a sore called ulcer. Occasional ly, an ulcer is so severe that a hole 
develops in the wall of the digestive tract and the contents of the tract sp ill into the abdominal 
cavity, leading to severe infections which may prove to be fatal, if i mmediate medical care is not 
sought.
Excessive secretion of gastric acid secretion is an important factor of peptic ulcer. Smoking, spicy 
food, alcoholic beverages, cofee, tea and stress should be avoided by th e patients sufering from 
ulcer.3412. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q.1           Fill in the blanks
                  (i)         Plants absorb minerals i n their _____________form, as found in the soil.
                  (ii)         In plants the most common n utrient deiciencies are o f ___________ , 
                               _____________ and___ ___________ .
                  (iii)        A plant requires_______ ______for holding its cell together.
                  (iv)       Most of the organic material in  a plant is ____________ .
                  (v)        Chlorosis is usually caus ed by insuicient___________ .
      
                  (vi)        In _____________the trap ped insects are decomposed by bacteria.
                  (vii)       The structure in the mouth that prevents food from entering the nasal
                               cavities is the ________ ___ . 
                  (viii)      The stomach functions to ___ _______ ana food and its________ .
                  (ix )       ___________ is the common  example of detritivore.
                  (x)         Pancreas produces_______ _____ which stimulates the conversion of glycogen to 
                               ______________ .
                  (xi)        Vomiting occurs due to ____ __________ movements.
Q.2           Short Questions
                 
                  (i)         What is the advantage of a d igestive tract as compared with a digestive cavity?
                  (ii)        What are functions of huma n liver?
                  (iii)       What measures should be ta ken to avoid food poisoning?3512. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                  (iv)       Can we get along without larg e intestine? if not why?
Q.3           Extensive questions
                  (i)        Deine nutrition. Describe the role of diferent elements in plant nutrition.
                  (ii)        a) Distinguish between sapr ophytic and parasitic modes of life, (b) i. Name one        
                              parasitic plant, ii. Desc ribe its method of nutrition, explaining why normal 
                              nutrition is not possible.
                  (iii)       What are heterotrophs? Describe diferent methods of nutrition in heterotrophs.
                  (iv)       What are the advantages and d isadvantages of the parasitic mode of life 
                              compared with that of a fr ee living organism.
                  (v)        Why is digestion necessary?  Describe what happens to a meal containing fats,     
                              carbohydrates and proteins while it is in the stomach of man.
                  (vi)       What is holozoic nutrition? Desc ribe the characteristics processes involved in              
                              holozoic nutrition giving the example of Amoeba.
                  (vii)      How do (i) the saliva, (ii) the pancreas, (iii) the liver help in the digestion of the                          
                              food of man? Draw a diagr am of the digestive system to show the positions of  
                              the pancreas and the liver.
                  (viii)     Make a labelled diagram of the alimentary and digestive glands in cockroach.   
                              What are the functions of the glands you sketch?
                  (ix)      Describe the structure and fun ctions of human stomach.
                  (x)       How do the digestive tract of herbi vores difer from those of carnivores?
                  (xi)       What prevents the wall of stoma ch from being digested?
                  (xii)      What specialized features of your small intestine account for the eicient 
                              absorption  of digested foodstu fs?3612. Nutrition eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1            
             (xiii)   W hat is the contribution of liver an d pancreas in the process of digestion?
             (xvi)   How can we control obesity?
             (xv)    How is gastric juice production regula ted?