CHAPTER
14Transport
Animation 14.1:T ransport in Plant
Source & Credit: mrgscience214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter our main focus would be to study diferent processes  involved in the transport of 
nutrients into the cells and removal of the wastes out of the cells. We wou ld also study, essentially 
in plants and animals, the elaborate mechanism involved not only f or the movement of individual 
molecules but also their mass transport within bodies. The processes  involved for getting materials 
into and out of the cells are difusion, facilitated difusion, osmos is, active transport, endocytosis, 
exocytosis etc. 
In animals, the materials move into, within and out of the body, in  respiratory circulatory, digestive 
and excretory systems. In plants the processes of respiration, trans portation, photosynthesis, 
absorption by roots, conduction of water, and the nutrients are involved in movement of the 
materials into, within and out of the body.
NEED FOR TRANSPORT OF MATERIALS
The living organism is a complex of interactions of physical a nd chemical reactions involving 
diferent elements and molecules. All living cells or living organi sms, must obtain and transport 
certain materials within the body and also transport and remove the w astes out of their bodies or 
cells.
If there were no transport systems, most of the cells of the body of a com plex multicellular organism, 
would not be able to get the required materials and dispose of their wa stes. There are no mass 
low systems in unicellular organisms and lower multicellular  organisms.
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
Uptake and Transport of Minerals and Water
The roots of a plant not only anchor the plant body in the soil, 
but also absorb minerals and water from the soil. There are 
three types of nutrients needed by the plants, carbon dioxide, 
water and A rye plant less than one meter tall 
has some 14 million branch roots 
of a combined length of over 600 
kilometers.314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1minerals besides light to carry out photosynthesis. To get these materia ls, roots must provide large 
surface area for absorption, which is achieved by extensive branc hing. The roots bear a dense 
cluster of tiny hair like structures which are extensions of epider mal cells of roots.
These are the root hairs, which are in fact the sites where most 
of the uptake of water and minerals takes place. 
Plants are able to sythesize all their required compounds, 
with the help of the minerals and H20 from soil, C02 from air, 
and light energy. Most of the minerals enter the root hairs 
or epidermal cells of roots along with water in bulk low, but 
some are taken in by difusion, facilitated difusion, or active 
transport.
Mineral absorption by roots 
The minerals available to plants for absorption are dissolved 
in the soil water. Their concentration vary according to the 
fertility and the acidity of the soil, besides other factors. When 
the soil minerals are not in solution but are bound by ionic 
bonds to soil particles, they are not available to plants.
Processes involved in absorption by roots 
The uptake of minerals by root cells is a combination of 
passive uptake and active uptake, involving the use of energy 
in the form of ATP. The passive uptake involves difusion. The 
minerals they also move down their concentration gradient 
through plasmodesmata (symplast pathway) to cells of cortex, 
endodermis, pericycle and then to sap in xylem cells. From 
here they are pulled up by transpiration pull to diferent parts 
of plant. 
The difusion  of ions along with water also takes place by 
mass low along the apoplast pathway. Ions moving in the apoplast can only reach the endodermis, 
where casparian strips prevent further progress (Fig. 14.1). T o cross the endodermis, ions must 
pass by difusion or active transport into endodermis cells, entering  their cytoplasm, and possibly 
their vacuoles. The ions then reach the xylem cells. Difusion of ions  can also take the vacuolar 
pathway where the ions move along their concentration gradient through th e cell membranes, 
cytoplasm, and tonoplast (the membrane of vacuoles), and reach the d ead xylem cells.It has been estimated that out 
of total surface area provided by 
roots, 67% is provided by the root 
hairs.
Prosopis trees of leguminoseae 
family have maximum depth of 
their roots, which is 50 metres.
When inorganic or organic fertilizer 
is applied to soil, the minerals are
absorbed primarily as inorganic 
ions. The rate of absorption of 
each mineral by roots is essentially
independent of the rates of 
absorption of water and of the 
other minerals. Each mineral 
moves into roots at a rate 
determined by such factors as 
its concentration both inside and 
outside the root, the ease with 
which it can passively penetrate 
cell membrane, and extent to 
which carrier molecules and active 
absorption are involved.414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Most of ions are taken up by the roots by the process of active transport.  By this method plants 
can take a mineral that is in higher concentration inside the root c ells than in the soil solution. In 
this process molecules and ions move from their low concentration to their  higher concentration 
(i.e. against the concentration gradient), through cell membrane, b y the use of energy in the form 
of ATP. Active transport is selective and is dependent on respiration. Some ions move by passive as 
well as by active transport.
Fig.14.1 Mineral and water uptake by roots. The Casparian s trip separates the extracellular space in the root into two c ompartments: 
an outer compartment that is continuous with the soil wate r, and an inner compartment that is continuous with the i nside of the 
conducting cells of the xylem. The black lines show a pat hway for both water and mineral; the blue line is an alte rnative pathway for 
water alone.
Animation 14.2: transpul
Source and Credit: msseconisseniorbiology514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Some nutrients are carried from the soil to the epidermal cells of roots through their cell membrane 
by facilitated difusion . In this type of difusion, carrier molecules within the cell mem brane 
transport nutrients across the membrane. These carrier molecules are proteins - which are present 
within cell membrane of epidermal and other root cells.
Uptake of Water by Roots
Normally, the movement of water molecules from a region of their higher concentration to a region 
of their low concentration through a partially permeable membrane is  called osmosis . If water 
moves by osmosis into a cell the process is called endosmosis, and if the water moves out of the 
cell it is called exosmosis. 
The cell wall of epidermal cells of roots is freely permeable to water  and other minerals. The cell 
membrane, however, is diferentially or partially permeable to some su bstances in the solution. 
The water which enters the epidermal cells moves along the concentration gradient and passes 
through cortex, endodermis, pericycle and ultimately to xylem cells.  (Fig. 14.2)Symbiotic Relationship 
helps plants acquire 
nutrients. 
One of the important 
nutrient N2 is almost always 
in short supply both in rock 
particles and in the soil water. 
Most plants have evolved 
beneicial relationship with 
other organisms that help 
the plants acquire these 
scarce nutrients. Examples 
include: Mycorrhize and 
nitrogen ixing bacteria in 
root nodules of legumes. Mycorrhizae help in uptake of minerals
The fungal associations with roots of higher plants, help 
mineral uptake by the plant.
The fungi facilitate the uptake of phosphorus and trace 
metals such as zinc and copper.
A root infected with mycorrhizal fungi can transport 
phosphate at a higher rate than that of an uninfected root.
Mycorrhizal fungi get sugar, and shelter from the plant and 
in exchange increase the plant’s mineral nutrient uptake 
eiciency. Mycorrhizae are present in 90% families of 
lowering plants.614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 14.2 Diagrammatic representation of water and ion movement  across a root showing transverse section. The apoplast pathwa y 
is of greatest importance for both water and solutes. The sympl ast pathway is less important, except for salts in the regi on of the 
endodermis. Movement along the vacuolar pathway is negligibl e.
Following are the paths taken by water to reach the xylem tissue:
(i) The apoplast pathway
It is the pathway involving system of adjacent cell walls which is continuous throughout the plant 
roots. In the roots apoplast pathway becomes discontinuous in the endoder mis due to the presence 
of casparian strips.
(ii) The Symplast pathway
It is the system of interconnected protoplasts in the root cells. The cytopl asm of neighbouring cells 
(Protoplasts) is connected with one another by Plasmodesmata which a re cytoplasmic strands that 
extend through pores in adjacent cell walls. In the cells of root the cell membrane and cytoplasm 
(and plasmodesmata) can be regarded as acting together as one par tially permeable membrane.
(iii) The vacuolar pathway
In this pathway water moves from vacuole to vacuole through neighbourin g cells crossing the 
symplast and apoplast in the process and moving through cell mem branes by osmosis. Water 
moves passively down a concentration gradient.714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Water Potential (Symbolized By Greek Letter Psi = yw )
Water molecules possess kinetic energy which means that in liquid  or gaseous form, they move 
about rapidly and randomly from one place to another. So, greater th e concentration of the water 
molecules in a system the greater is the total kinetic energy of water mol ecules. This is called water 
potential ( yw).
In plant cells two factors determine water potential.
i)  Solute concentration (Osmotic or solute potential = ys)
ii) Pressure generated when water enters and inlates plant cells (P ressure potential = yp).
Pure water has maximum water potential which by deinition is zer o.
Water moves from a region of higher yw to lower yw .
All solutions have lower yw than pure water and so have negative value of yw (at atmospheric 
pressure and at a deined temperature). So osmosis  can be deined as:
“The movement of water molecules from a region of higher water potential to a region of lower 
water potential through a partially permeable membrane”.
Osmotic (Solute) Potential =  ys
The osmotic (solute) potential ys is a measure of the change in water potential( ys) of a system 
due to the presence of solute molecules. ys is always negative. More solute molecules present, 
lower (more negative) is the ys.
Pressure Potential (yp)
If pressure greater than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure w ater or a solution, its water 
potential increases. It is equivalent to pumping water from one place to another. Such a situation 
may arise in living systems.
When water enters plant cells by osmosis pressure may be built up  inside the cell making the cell 
turgid and increasing the pressure potential. Thus the total water p otential is sum of ys and yp.
                       y w               =                       ys                      +                     yp
                  water potential                   solute pote ntial                    pressure potential814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1If we use the term water potential, the tendency for water to move between any tw o systems can 
be measured; not just from cell to cell in a plant but also from s oil to root from leaf to air or from 
soil to air. The steeper the potential gradient the faster is the low of wa ter along it.
The following example would help understand the concept of water potenti al. Two adjacent 
vacuolated cells are shown with  yw, yp and ys.
                                                                                     Fig. 14.3 Two adjac ent vacuolated cells.
Q.      a)  Which cell has the higher water potential?
          b) In which direction will water move by osmosis?
          c) What will be the water potential of the cells at equilibrium?
          d) What will be the solute potential and pressure potential of the cells at 
               equilibrium?
Plasmolysis and Pressure Potential
Plasmolysis can be deined as the shrinkage of protoplast due to exos mosis of water. When a living 
cell is placed in a solution having lower water potential than that of the cell, plasmolysis takes place 
and the cell is called plasmolysed. If this plasmolysed cell is placed in distilled water (which has 
highest water potential) the water molecules would move from distilled wa ter through diferentially 
permeable cell membrane into the cell, and the cell would become depla smolysed.kPa= 1000 Pascals - 
which is the pressure 
exerted by a vertical 
force of one Newton 
on an area of 1 metre 
square.914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The point at which plasmolysis is just about to happen is call ed incipient plasmolysis . At incipient 
plasmolysis the protoplast has just ceased to exert any pressure aga inst the cell wall, so the cell is 
laccid.
If a plasmolysed cell is placed in distilled water, the one havi ng higher water potential than the 
contents of the cell, water enters the cell by endosmosis, volume of protopla st increases, and it 
begins to exert pressure against the cell wall of plant cell. The c ell wall is rigid - so the pressure exerted 
by the protoplast against the cell wall is called pressure potential . As the pressure potential of the 
cell increases due to endosmosis, the cell becomes turgid. Full turg idity i.e. maximum pressure 
potential is achieved when a cell is placed in pure water or disti lled water.
The animal cells cannot withstand higher pressure potential as th ere is no cell wall around protoplast. 
Thus the turgid cells burst in a solution of higher water potential . So the animals employ the 
mechanism of osmoregulation to maintain the amount of water and salts  in their cells to constant 
or nearly constant levels.
ASCENT OF SAP
In the previous pages you have learned that water and dissolved minera ls traverse the cortex 
and endodermis and reach the xylem tissue of roots. (Fig. 14.1,1 4.2) Actually, water and dissolved 
minerals are carried or pulled upwards towards the leaves through  xylem tissue. This is called 
ascent of sap. This may involve the following :
(A)       Cohesion Tension Theory       (B)        Root Pressure            (C)            Imbibition
(A) Cohesion tension theory  is one of the most important theories proposed by Dixon. This 
theory provides a reasonable explanation of low of water and minerals  upwards from the roots 
to leaves of plants, in bulk low or mass low (Fig. 14.5). Thi s depends on the following:
(i) Cohesion:  It is the attraction among water molecules which hold water together, f orming a solid 
chain-like column within the xylem tubes. The water molecules form  hydrogen bonds between 
them.
(ii) Tension:  It is provided when this water chain is pulled up in the xylem  (Fig. 14.4). Transpiration1014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1provides the necessary energy or force. Tension is between the molecules of  water by hydrogen 
bonds. 
This xylem water tension is strong enough to pull water up to 200 m etres (more than 600 feet) in 
plants.
(iii) Adhesion:  It may be added that the water molecules also adhere to the cell walls  of xylem cells, 
so that the column of water in xylem tissue does not break. The composi tion of cell wall provides 
necessary adhesion to water molecules that helps water creep up. The c ellulose component of cell 
wall especially has great ainity for water. It can imbibe water .
Fig.14.4 (a) Xylem Tissue elements involved in transport ation of water and dissolved minerals, (b) Scanning electron  micrograph of 
two large vessel elements of a cucumber root.
(iv) Strong xylem walls: It is essential that the xylem walls should have high tensile streng th if they 
are not to buckle inwards. The lignin and cellulose provides stren gth to cell wall of xylem vessels 
(Fig. 14.4).1114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1By cohesion-tension of water molecules, and the transpiration pull p roviding the necessary energy, 
the sap (water and minerals) in xylem tissue is pulled upwar ds to the leaves. Large quantities of 
water are carried at relatively high speed, upto 8mh-1 being recorded in tall trees, and commonly 
in other plants at 1mh-1. 
The total water pulled up in the leaves is transpired, except about 1%  which is used by plant in 
various activities including photosynthesis.
Mechanism of transpiration pull in cohesion tension theory
The evaporation of water from the aerial parts of the plant especially through stomata of leaves 
is a process called transpiration . As a leaf transpires the water potential of its mesophyll cells 
drops. This drop, causes water to move by osmosis from the xylem cel ls of leaf into dehydrating 
mesophyll cells. The water molecules leaving the xylem are attached to other water molecules 
in the same xylem tube by hydrogen bonds (cohesion of water molecules ). Therefore, when one 
water molecule moves up the xylem,  the process continues all the way to the root - where water 
is pulled from the xylem cells (tracheids and vessels). This p ull also causes water to move down its 
concentration gradient transversely from the root epidermis (root hairs) to cortex by endosmosis 
and to pericycle. This pulling force or transpiration pull is  so strong that it also reduces the water 
potential of root epidermal cells. Then water in the soil moves from its higher water potential to 
lower water potential of epidermis of root by osmosis.
Animation 14.3: Transpiration pull
Source and Credit: gifsoup1214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
 
 
   
 
 
                        Fig.14.5 The cohesion-tension th eory of water low from root to leaf.1314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(B) Root pressure : Second force involved in the movement of water and dissolved minerals up 
in the xylem tissue is the root pressure. Root pressure is created by th e active secretion of salts and 
other solutes from the other cells into the xylem sap. This lowers the wa ter potential of xylem sap. 
Water enters the xylem cells by osmosis, thus increasing the level of sap in the xylem cells. Water
entering the xylem cells, may take apoplast, symplast or vacuolar pathway increasing the hydrostatic 
pressure in cells, this pushes the water upwards. As a result of root pressure the sap in the xylem 
does not rise to enough height in most plants. The root pressure is als o least efective during the 
day, when transpiration pull is the active force involved in pulli ng the sap in xylem cells upwards. 
It has been estimated that a positive hydrostatic pressure of around 10 0 to 200 KPa (exceptionally 
800 KPa) is generated by root pressure. The pressure mentioned above i s not enough to push 
water upwards to required height in most plants. But it is no doub t a contributing factor in plants 
which transpire slowly, and are smaller in size.
Closely associated with root pressure 
is a phenomenon called guttation or 
exudation. Guttation is loss of liquid 
water through water secreting glands 
or hydathodes. The dew drops that can 
be seen on the tips of grass leaves or 
strawberry leaves are actually guttation 
droplets exuded from hydathodes. (Fig. 
14.6).
Guttation or exudation is more notable 
when transpiration is suppressed, and 
the relative humidity is high as at night. 
The guttation is in fact due to positive 
pressure - the root pressure, developed 
in xylem tissue of roots.
(C) Imbibition : Another important force in the ascent of sap is imbibition. Sacks in 1874 sugested 
that the water molecules move along the cell walls of xylem vessels due to imbibition.
The cell wall components especially cellulose, pectin and lignin  can take up water and as a result
Fig. 14.6 Guttation by stawberry leaves1414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1increase in volume, but the components do not dissolve in water, this is  called imbibition. The 
amount of attraction and increase of dry cell walls of plant cel ls, and of protoplasm for water is 
often very great and considerable imbibition forces may be developed in  plant body. The root cell 
walls imbibe water from the soil, and this water moves by apoplas t pathway already discussed.
Imbibition is a reversible process and when water is lost the origi nal volume of cell wall and of 
protoplasm is restored. The uptake of water by imbibition is especia lly important in germinating 
seeds. The volume of dry seed may increase up to 200 times by imbi bition, as a result, the seed 
coat ruptures and makes the germination of seed efective. 
Bleeding :  Sometimes it so happens that certain plants, when cut, pruned, tap ped or otherwise 
wounded, show a low of sap from the cut ends or surfaces quite often  with a considerable force. 
This phenomenon is commonly called bleeding .
It is often seen in many land plants in the spring, particula rly grape wine, some palms, sugar maple 
etc.
Although the low of sap is ordinarily slow, a considerable qua ntity of the sap within a period of 24 
hours comes out of the plant. In some palms when tapped, there may b e a low of sap to the extent 
of 10-15 litres per day. The sap in such plants contains su gars and water in addition to organic and 
inorganic substances (e.g. salts).
There are two main factors responsible for bleeding, the hydrostatic pressure in xylem and phloem 
elements, and the root pressure, which is exerted by the xylem tissues of roots.
TYPES OF TRANSPIRATION
You have already studied the role of transpiration, in ascent of sap .
There are three types of transpiration depending upon the route of escape of water vapours from 
the aerial parts of the plant.
(i) Cuticular transpiration       (ii) Lenticular transpir ation           (iii) Stomatal transpiration1514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(i) Cuticular transpiration :  The loss of water in the form of water vapours through the cuticle 
of leaves is called cuticular transpiration. About 5-7% of total tr anspiration takes place through this 
route.
The cuticle present on the upper and lower epidermis of leaves is not c ompletely impermeable 
to water and some water is lost in the form of vapours through cuticle.  The thinner the cuticle 
the greater is the rate of transpiration; although the composition of cuti cle is also important. At 
night, when the stomata are almost closed, cuticular transpiration takes place. Most of the factors 
which afect rate of transpiration, in general, are also important in controlling the rate of cuticular 
transpiration.
(ii) Lenticular transpiration :  Lenticular transpiration is the loss of water vapours through 
lenticels present in the stem of some plants. (Fig. 14.7) All pla nts do not possess lenticels.Animation 14.4: Transpiration
Source and Credit: atmos.uiuc1614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The lenticular transpiration is 1-2% of the total transpiration by  a plant. These openings, like 
stomata,are also involved in the exchange of gases between environment. When  there is strong 
light and high temperature,the loss of vapours is rapid because i t is governed by difusion.
Lenticels are aerating pores formed in the bark through which exch ange of gases takes place, and 
water is lost in the form of water vapours (transpiration). External ly, they appear as scars or small 
protrusions on the surface of stem. Lenticel consists of a loose mass of small, thin-walled cells. 
At each lenticel the cork cambium forms oval, spherical, or irreg ular cells, which are very loosely 
arranged, having lots of intercellular spaces.
 
Fig. 14.7 Left : The waterproof outer bark (layer of dark cells on  the surface) on this section of stem is interrupted at the  center of 
the lenticel. Thus the more loosely arranged cell layer ben eath, with their numerous intercellular air spaces, are exp osed to the 
atmosphere, Right: The individual lenticels can be see n as white areas on the surface of a young stem.
(iii) Stomatal transpiration : It is a type of transpiration in which the water vapours  escape 
through stomata. In isobilateral leaves the stomata are present, in both,  upper and lower epidermis 
e.g. lily and maize leaf. In dorsiventral leaves the stomata are con ined to only the lower epidermis.
The guard cells are normally dumble or bean-seed-shaped. The i nner concave sides of two guard 
cells enclose the stoma. This inner side of guard cell has very th ick cell wall, but the outer convex1714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1side has thin cell wall. The guard cells are the only cells, of leaf epidermis, which are not connected 
by plasmodesmata to other epidermal cells, and which have chloropl asts - and thus are involved 
in the process of photosynthesis (Fig. 14.8). When these guard cel ls are turgid, the stoma between 
them opens and when the guard cells are laccid the stoma between them closes. The degree of 
opening of stomatal pores also afects the rate of transpiration. 90% of  total transpiration in a plant 
is stomatal.
The cells of mesophyll of leaf provide enormous surface ‘area for th e loss of water in the form of 
vapours. The pathway of water vapours loss to the atmosphere, through s tomata is shown. (Fig. 
14.8)
Fig.14.8 The water pathway through the leaf. Water is drawn  from the xylem into the cell walls of the mesophyll, where it evaporates 
into the air spaces within the leaf. By difusion, water vapour then moves through the leaf air space, through the stoma tal pore, and 
across the boundary layer of still air that adheres to the out er leaf surface. C02 also difuses into the leaf through stomata along a 
concentration gradient.
OPENING AND CLOSING OF STOMATA
The guard cells function as multisensory hydraulic valves (Fi g. 14.9). Environmental factors, such as 
light intensity and quality, temperature, relative humidity, and i ntracellular CO2 concentration are1814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1sensed by guard cells and these signals are integrated into well- deined stomatal responses.
There are two hypotheses which may explain the opening and closing  of stomata.
i) Starch Sugar Hypothesis :  The German botanist H. Van Mohl proposed that the guard cells 
are the only photosynthesising cells of epidermis of leaf and suga rs are produced in them during 
day time when light is available. When sugar level rises i.e. s olute concentration increases or water 
potential decreases - and the guard cells become turgid due to entry of  water and they separate 
from one another, and stoma or pore opnes. During night there is no ph otosynthesis the sugars 
are either converted into insoluble starch or are used in respiration, this decreases free sugars 
in cell. So the osmotic pressure of guard cells is lowered, and w ater leaves the guard cells, which 
become laccid and stoma or pore between them closes. But these processes a re not fast enough 
to account for the rapid rise in turgor, of guard cells.
ii) Inlux of K+ ions : Potassium concentration in guard cells increases several fold, dep ending 
upon plant species.
Stomata open due to active transport of potassium ions (K+) into the guard cells from the surrounding 
epidermis. The accumulation of K+ decreases the osmotic potential of guard cells. Water enters 
the guard cells by osmosis, which become more turgid and stretched  and stomata are opened. 
The stoma closes by reverse process; involving passive difusion of K+ from guard cells followed 
by water moving out by osmosis. What controls the movement of K+ into and out of guard cells? 
Level of carbon dioxide in the spaces inside the leaf and light, c ontrol this movement. A low level 
of carbon dioxide favours opening of the stomata, thus allowing an increased carbon dioxide level 
and increased rate of photosynthesis.
Exposure to blue light, which is also efective in photosynthesis has  been shown to acidify the 
environment of the guard cells (i.e. pumps out protons) which enabl e the guard cells to take up K+ 
followed by water uptake resulting in increased turgidity of guar d cells. So in general stoma are 
open during day and closed at night. This prevents needless loss of water by the plant when it is 
too dark for photosynthesis.
The plants open their stomata by actively pumping Potassium in gu ard cells causing water to follow 
by osmosis. Guard cells become turgid and stoma or pore opens. When  Potassium leaves the 
guard cells (during night) water leaves the guard cells by exos mosis and guard cells become laccid 
and stoma or pore between guard cells closes.1914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 14.9 Stomata . Stomata seen through (a) the light micros cope and (b) scanning electron microscope. In the light mic rograph, note 
that the guard cells contain chloroplasts (the green ovals w ithin the cells) but that the other epidermal cells do not.
Factors affecting the rate of transpiration
Rate of transpiration for a plant is very important as the transpir ation stream is necessary to 
Animation 14.5: Stomata
Source and Credit: gifsoup2014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1distribute dissolved mineral salts throughout the plant. Water is tra nsported to photosynthesizing 
cells of leaves. Transpiration is also very important as it cools th e plant. This is especially important 
in higher temperatures. If the rate of transpiration is very high, there would be much loss of water 
from the plant, so at high temperatures the stomata almost close and red uction in the rate of 
transpiration is efected. This stops wilting of the leaves and of pl ants (herbaceous plants).
There are some important factors which afect the rate of transpiration in a plant.
(i)           Light                                                 (ii)            Temperature
(iii)         CO2 concentration                        ( iv)            Humidity and vapour pressure
(v)          Wind and                                         (vi)            Availability of soil water.
i) Light : The opening and closing of stomata is directly controlled by the li ght. In strong light the 
rate of transpiration is much more as compared with that in dim light or no light. As Potassium 
actively enters the guard cells, when light is available, water fol lows - and guard cells become turgid, 
and stoma opens.
ii) Temperature:  When the sun-light is strong on a bright and sunny day the en vironmental 
temperature is increased. The higher temperature reduces the humidity of the surrounding air. 
The evaporation of water from the surfaces of mesophyll cells also in creases, thus increasing the 
rate of transpiration.
The rate of transpiration doubles by every rise of 10°C in temperatur e. Very high environmental 
temperature, i.e. 40-45°C cause closure of stomata, so that plant does  not loose much needed water. 
If higher temperatures are maintained in the environment 
for a longer duration and soil water is limited, the plants 
would wilt and may die.
iii) Carbon dioxide concentration :  Low carbon 
dioxide concentration (such as those that occurs during the 
day when photosynthesis exceeds respiration), stimulates 
the active transport of Potassium ions into the guard cells. This tra nsport (as discussed earlier) 
causes stomata to open and allow C02 to difuse in the mesophyll cells of leaves. At night cellular 
respiration in the absence of photosynthesis raises C02 levels. This halts the inward transport of K+, 
and thus of water, allowing the guard cells to become laccid and  stomata close. Thus transpiration 
almost stops.Hormones are involved in stomatal movement in 
plants. At high temperature when leaf cells start 
wilting a hormone is released by mesophyll cells. 
This hormone is called abscisic acid. This hormone 
stops the active transport of K+ into guard cells, 
overriding the efect of light and C02 concentration. 
So K+ pumping stops. Stomata close.2114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1iv) Humidity and vapour pressure : When air is dry, the rate of difusion of water molecules, 
from the surfaces of mesophyll cells, air spaces, and through stomata to outside the leaf, increases 
(Fig. 14.8). So more water is lost, increasing the rate of transp iration. In humid air the difusion rate 
is reduced. This decreases the rate of transpiration appreciably.
v) Wind :  The air in motion is called wind, which causes increase in  rate of difusion of water 
molecules. The rate of evaporation from the surfaces of mesophyll cells  increases. When air is still, 
the rate of movement of water molecules (difusion) is slowed down, thus reducing the rate of 
transpiration.
vi) Availability of soil water :  If there is little water in the soil, less is brought or transported 
to the leaf cells and less is lost to the environment by transpiration. So when the rate of absorption 
of water in root cells is reduced, the rate of transpiration is reduc ed.
Transpiration as a necessary evil
Transpiration has been described as necessary evil because it is  an inevitable, but potentially 
harmful consequence of the existence of wet cell surfaces from which  evaporation occurs. Loss of 
water from the plant can lead to wilting, serious desiccation and often death of a plant if conditions 
of drought are experienced. There is good evidence that even mild water str ess results in reduced 
growth rate and in crops to economic losses through reduction of yield .
Despite its apparent inevitability it is also of very great importance f or the plant.
i)  Water is conducted or transported in most tall plants with the c ourtesy of transportation pull. 
ii) Minerals dissolved in water are distributed throughout plant b ody by transpiration stream.
iii) Evaporation of water from the exposed surface of cells of leaves h as cooling efect on plant.
iv) Wet surface of leaf cells allow gaseous exchange.
TRANSLOCATION OF ORGANIC SOLUTES
Organic solutes are transported by phloem tissue.
Phloem Transport
The phloem is generally found on the outer side of both primary and  secondary vascular tissue in 
plants with secondary growth. The phloem constitute the inner bark. The cells of phloem thatconduct2214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1or transport sugars and other organic material throughout the plant are called sieve elements.
In addition to sieve elements, phloem tissue also contains companion cel ls, parenchyma cells, and 
in some cases ibres, sclereids and latex containing cells. However , only sieve tube cells are directly 
involved in transport of organic solutes. 
Sieve elements are characterised by ‘sieve areas’ portions of the cell wa ll where pores interconnect 
the conducting cells. Some of the sieve areas of sieve tube members are gen erally formed in end 
walls of sieve tube members where the individual cells are joined togeth er to form a longitudinal 
series called a sieve tube. Sieve plate pores of sieve tubes are essentially  open channels, that allow 
transport between cells (Fig. 14.10).
Fig. 14.10 (a) This diagram shows part of the root phloem consi sting of sieve tube members stacked end to end. Adjoining end walls 
have common pores. Each sieve tube member is associated w ith a companion cell (b) Sieve tube member showing the pore s in its end 
walls. Note the scarcity of cytoplasmic components in thes e sugar conducting cells.
Each sieve tube member is associated with one or more companion cells.  Sieve tubes and companion 
cells are in communication with each other by plasmodesmata. Comp anion cells supply ATP and 
proteins to sieve tubes. The photosynthetic products from photosynthesizing cells, the mesophyll 
and palisade layer of leaf, pass into sieve tubes, through the comp anion cell via plasmodesmata.
Patterns of Transport
Phloem transport does not occur exclusively in an upward or a down ward direction and is not 
deined with respect of gravity. Transport or translocation occurs fr om the areas of supply (sources) 
to areas of metabolism or storage (sinks).2314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The areas of sources include any exporting organ typically a m ature leaf, or storage organ, that is 
capable of
i) Storing photosynthate in excess of its own needs. 
ii) Storage organ during the exporting phase of its development. In b iennials e.g root of beet is a 
sink in irst growing season, but becomes source in the 
next growing season, when sugars are utilized in growth 
of new shoots.
iii) Sinks are the areas of active metabolism or storage 
for example roots, tubers, developing fruits, immature 
leaves, and even the growing tips of stem and root.
The movement in phloem is from source to sinks in most 
of the plants during active photosynthesis.The composition of materials lowing in phloem has 
been studied by using aphids - the insects which are 
phloem feeders (Fig 14.11). These insects insert their 
stylets into stem or leaf and extend them to puncture 
a sieve tube. The pressure in the sieve tube cell forces 
sap through aphid’s digestive tract and out its posterior 
end as droplets called “honey dew”. The composition of 
honey dew have revealed that it contains 10-25% dry 
matter 90% or more of which is sucrose. Nitrogenous 
compounds are about 1%.
Animation 14.6 Absorptive Root 
Source & Credit: cas.miamioh2414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
                                                              Fig.14.11 Collection of phloem sap using aphids
The Mechanism of phloem translocation/transport
The theory called, Pressure - Flow Theory, is the most acceptable theor y for the transport in the 
phloem of angiosperms. We have considerable evidence to support this theor y. There were two 
main categories of theories to account for movement of sap in phloem. The active theories involving 
the use of energy for the movement of materials in phloem, and the passi ve theories in which no 
use of energy was involved. The active theories have all been abandoned a s there is not much 
evidence to support these theories.
Now we are left with passive theories of transport / translocation. Thes e include:2514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1(i)       Difusion                                                   (ii)        Pressure low theory
(i)   Difusion:  is far too slow, to account for the velocities of sugar movement in phloem , which 
on the average is 1 metre per hour, while the rate of difusion is 1 m etre per eight years. So we are 
left with pressure low theory.
               Fig.14.12 Movement of sugars from mesophyll ce lls to sieve elements.
(ii)   Pressure low theaory:  A hypothesis was irst proposed by Ernst Munch in 1930. It s tates 
that the low of solution in the sieve elements is driven by anosmotically generated pressure 
gradient between””source and sink. Now this hypothesis has been gi ven status of a theory. See Fig. 
14.13, the following steps,explain pressure low theory.
(1)   The glucose formed in the photosynthesizing cells, is used within the cells (for respiration 
etc.) and the rest is converted into non-reducing sugar i.e. sucrose.  (2) This sucrose is actively  
transported through the bundle sheath cells to the companion cell of the smallest vein in leaf, a2614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1short distance transport (involving 2 - 3 cells). Thus sucrose d ifuses through plasmodesmata to 
sieve tube cell or sieve element, raising the concentration of sucrose in i t. (Fig. 14.12) The pathway 
taken by sucrose is symplast in most cases; but is some, apopla stic movement does take place. 
The sucrose is actively transported to the sieve elements. (3) The water moves  by osmosis from the 
nearby xylem in the leaf vein. This increases the hydrostatic pres sure of the sieve tube element.
(4) Hydrostatic pressure moves the sucrose and other substances in th e sieve tube cells, and moves 
to sinks e.g. fruits and roots. In the storage sinks, such as s ugar beet root and sugarcane stem, 
sucrose is removed into apoplast prior to entering symplast of the sink . 
(5) Water moves out of sieve tube cell by osmosis, lowering the hydrostati c pressure.  
In symplastic pathway, sucrose (or sugars) move through plasm odesmata to the receiver cell. Thus 
according to pressure low theory, the pressure gradient is establish ed as a consequence of entry 
of sugars in the sieve elements at the source; and removal of sugars ( sucrose) at the sink (Fig. 
14.13). The energy driven entry of sugars in sieve tube elements, gen erate high osmotic pressure 
in the sieve tube elements of the source causing a steep drop in the water potential.
(6) The presence of sieve plates greatly increases the resistance along  the pathway and results in 
the generation and maintenance of a substantial pressure gradient i n the sieve elements between 
source and sink.
The sieve element’s contents are physically pushed along the transporta tion pathway by bulk low, 
much like water lowing through a garden hose.
The pressure low theory accounts for the mass low of molecules within  phloem. It may be noted 
that the transpertation of photosynthate or carbohydrates from the mesophyl l cells to phloem 
tissue involves difusion and active transport (carrier mediated trans port). Then in phloem tissue 
(sieve tubes) the movement of materials is according to pressure low theory . 
Again in the sink cells when the sugar and the carbohydrates a re passed from the phloem tissue, 
difusion and carrier mediated transport, either passive or active, ta kes place, (see table 14.1).2714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 14.13 The Pressure-low theory (1) A photosynthesizing le af manufactures sucrose (red dots), which (2) is actively transported (red 
arrow) into a nearby companion cell. The sucrose difuses to s ieve-tube element through plasmodesmata, raising the concen tration 
of sucrose. (3) Water (blue dots leaves nearby xylem and m oves into the “leaf end” of the sieve tube by osmosis (blu e arrow), raising 
the hydrostatic pressure. (4) The same sieve tube connec ts to a developing fruit (sink); sucrose enters the companion  cells by difusion 
through plasmodesmata. It is then actively transported out of the companion cells and into the fruit cells. (5) Water moves out of 
the sieve tube by osmosis, lowering the hydrostatic pressure  within the tube. (6) High pressure in the leaf end of th e phloem and low 
pressure in the fruit end cause water, together with any di ssolved solutes, to low in bulk from leaf (source) to fruit. (Bl ack arrow).2814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1TRANSPORT IN ANIMALS
Unicellular animals have maximum surface area to volume ratio; a nd most of the substances move 
into or out of their bodies by simple difusion, osmosis, active trans port, and facilitated difusion. 
So there are no special transport systems involved. Same is true of sim ple multicellular animals 
which are aquatic. But complex multicellular animals possess  highly organized, and well developed 
transport system, in the form of blood vascular system.
Transportation in Hydra
It is fresh water in habitat. The body is two layered; 
the outer ectoderm and inner endoderm; in between 
them is mesogloea which is non-cellular. The outer 
surfaces of the ectoderm cells are exposed to the 
water in which the animal lives. Water, dissolved 02, 
and food is taken into the coelenteron(enteron) of 
Hydra by the movement of tentacles, and lagella 
which are present in most cells of endoderm.
The materials and food may be absorbed or taken 
up by endocytosis into endodermal cells. The 
indigestible and partly digested food is removed 
by exocytosis from these cells, into digestive cavity 
(coelenteron). Ectodermal cells get food from 
endodermal cells by difusion.
The ectodermal cells directly exchange materials 
with the surrounding water (Fig 14.14). They also 
get nutrients from endodermal cells.
Fig.14.14 Hydra2914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1  
Transportation in Planaria
The body of Planaria is lat, so the most of its cells are exposed to the outer water. Difusion is the 
process involved in the movement of materials into and out of the cells.
There is no special transport system in Planaria. The reasons a re:
(i)   The body of Planaria is lat, and provides greater surfa ce area for the exchange of materials,  
      between the body and the environment.
(ii)  Planaria is acoelomate i.e. there is no body cavity and the mesodermal layer or mesenchyme is 
       composed of loosely packed cells between ectoderm and endoderm. Whatever materials, such 
       as 02, difuse in the ectoderm, pass to mesoderm cells and then difuse in to endoderm cells. 
        For the removal of wastes the same route is reversed. Intestinal caecae reach near almost every  
       cell of the body and digested food is provided to the cells by  difusion. The endoderm cells, can 
        also acquire food, water, dissolved minerals, and to som e extent 02. and remove wastes into the 
       gut.
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
In the body of larger and complex animals, there is very little exp osed surface area to volume ratio. 
Most of the cells are not exposed to the external environment directly and it becomes very diicult 
to transport materials by simpl difusion. Complex animals have evolved transport systems in the 
form of blood vascular system or circulatory system.
Characteristics of Circulatory System
A circulatory system accounts for rapid mass low of materials from one part of the body to the 
other, where difusion would be too slow.
There are three characteristics of a circulatory system.
(A)  A circulatory luid - the blood.
(B)  A contractile pumping device - which may be the modiied blood vess el or a heart.
(C)  Tubes, which can transport the circulatory luid (blood) to an d from cells of the body These   
       tubes are the blood vessels. Materials must be exchanged between  the circulatory luid and 
       other body cells.3014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Open and Closed Circulatory System
The circulatory systems of animals are divided into two main types :
a) Open circulatory system:  It is observed in animals belonging to Phylum Arthropoda (crus taceans, 
spiders, insects) and Phylum Mollusca (snails and clams ) and group of protochordates, the tunicates.
b) closed circulatory system:     It is observed in animals belonging to annelids,cephalopod m olluscs 
(squids and octopus), echinoderms and vertebrates.
The diferences between open circulatory system and closed circulatory  system would be clear by 
studying the comparison between circulartary systems of earth worm and cockroach, (see table 
14.1).
Animation 14.7: Circulatory System
Source and Credit: technostrikers3114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                          Table 14.1 Comparison between closed and open circ ulatory systems.
Closed circulatory system e.g.
Earthworm ( Pheretima )Open circulatory system e.g.
cockroach ( Periplaneta )
1. Blood always remain in the blood vessels, and 
does not come in direct contact with other cells 
of the body.1. Blood does not remain enclosed in the blood 
vessels and comes in direct contact with other 
body cells, and bathes them.
2. Inter connected system of arteries , veins, and 
capillaries present.2. There are no typical arteries, veins, and 
capillaries and for much of the time the blood 
called haemolymph lows in the cavities or 
sinuses of body cavity (hoemocoel) around the 
viscera (perivisceral sinus) and around the nerve
cord (perineural sinus).
3. Exchange of nutrients and waste products 
between the blood and tissues via tissue luid 
occurs through capillaries.3. Exchange of nutrients and waste products 
between the blood and tissues occurs when 
blood directly bathes the tissues.
4. The system also transports gases i.e. oxygen 
and carbon dioxide.4. This sytem does not transport gases i.e. 
oxygen and carbon dioxide (these gases are 
transported by tracheal system).
5. Respiratory pigment haemoglobin is dissolved 
in blood. Nucleated white blood cells are present.5. No respiratory pigment and blood is colourless 
in which nucleated white blood cells loat.
6. This is regarded as the most advanced type, 
having greater eiciency, maintaining the blood 
pressure and economy of blood volume.6. This is regarded as primitive having lesser 
eiciency and does not maintain blood pressure.
7. In earthworm there are 4 or 5 pairs of lateral 
hearts present on the lateral side of oesophagus 
in 7th to 13th segments. Hearts pump the blood 
from the dorsal to the ventral blood vessel.7. In cockroach the heart is 13-chambered, 
tubular vessel present in the pericardial sinus 
and placed in mid-dorsal region below terga in 
abdominal region. On the side of the pericardial 
sinus there are alary muscles helping in the 
low of blood. Each heart chamber has a pair of 
lateral openings, the ostia.
8. There are three main longitudinally running 
blood vessels, dorsal, ventral and sub-neural, 
which are interconnected through capillaries 
and commissural vessels.8. The portion of the tubular dorsal vessel
which extends in the thoracic and head
region is called the “aorta”. It opens
anteriorly in the haemocoel of the head by
funnel shaped opening.3214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.19. The dorsal vessel collects blood from the 14th 
segment backwards. In the irst 13 segments 
it becomes distributing channel and sends its 
blood to hearts and anterior end of the body. 
Ventral vessel is the chief distributing vessel with 
backward low.The subneural vessel is collecting 
vessel and the low of blood is backwards. It 
communicates with dorsal blood vessel through 
commissural vessels.9. The low of blood from heart to, aorta to, 
haemocoel in head, to perivisceral sinus, 
to perineural sinus, to pervisceral sinus, to 
pericardial sinus, and to heart through ostia.
              Fig. 14.15 Closed circulatory system of earthworm
Animation 14.8: Closed circulatory system of earthworm
Source and Credit: waterwereld3314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig.14.16 Open circulatory system of cockroach, (a) The hea rt with alary muscle and dorsal diaphragm, 
(b) T.S of cockroach through thorax showing various sinuses.
Vertebrate blood circulatory system
The components of vertebrate blood vascular system are typical of a cir culatory system-blood, 
heart, blood vessels (arteries, capillaries and veins). All vertebra tes have closed circulatory system 
In addition there is lymphatic system which also aids in tran sportation.
Heart pumps the blood to diferent parts of the body via aorta and arteri es Arteries break into ine 
blood vessels, the capillaries. These join to form veins which brin g blood back to the heart. The 
capillaries are sites where exchange of materials between blood and body tissues takes place.
Evolution of vertebrate heart
The heart of ishes have sinus venosus, an atrium, a ventricle, and  bulbus arteriosus or conus 
arteriosus. Sinus venosus receives deoxygenated blood from the body,and then blood is passed 
to atrium, which on contraction passes it to ventricle. ventricle has th ick muscular wall. When 
the muscles of ventricle contract, they push the blood via conus arterios us or bulbous arteriosus 
(proximal swollen portion of ventral aorta).3414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1    
Thus the heart of fishes works as a single circuit heart . The blood flows in one direction only, 
from sinus venosus to atrium then to ventricle 
and to ventral aorta via bulbus arteriosus or conus 
arteriosus to the gills and then to the body. The 
blood returns to the heart in the sinus venosus The 
oxygenated blood is supplied from dorsal aorta 
through coronary arteries,to the heart and is carried 
back by coronary veins from the heart). 
In amphibians the heart is three chambered with regard to auricl es and ventricles.There are two 
auricles and one ventricle. In addition, sinus venosus and trunc us arteriosus are also present.
Sinus venosus receives de-oxygenated blood from two superior venacavae (pr ecavals) and one 
inferior vena cava (postcaval) from diferent parts 
of the body. This blood passes to the right auricle. 
The oxygenated blood from lungs is poured via 
pulmonary veins into left auricle. Both auricles 
contract simultaneously and blood is passed 
into the ventricle. There is a complete mixing 
of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the 
ventricle. When ventricle contracts, it pushes 
blood via truncus arteriosus, to two carotids, two 
systemics, and two pulmocutaneous arches. 
(Fig. 14.19b).The heart of the ishes never receives oxygenated blood. 
It is only the deoxygenated blood which passes through 
diferent chambers of the heart. (Fig. 14.18 a). The valve s 
present in the heart control the low of blood in single 
direction i.e. sinus venosus —> atrium —> ventricle conus 
arteriosus —> ventral aorta —> gills —> dorsal aorta —» 
body —» sinus venosus. So the heart of ishes functions as 
a single circuit heart.
Fig. 14.17 Structure of heart of frog           
Animation 14.9: Structure of heart of frog           
Source and Credit: multelearn3514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                         
Fig.14.18 A schematic comparison of vertebrate heart and circula tion of blood. (A) In modern ish 
the blood is pumped to the gills, where it picks up oxygen. The oxy genated blood (red) then passes 
without further pumping to the systemic circulation, where it gives u p its oxygen before returning 
to the heart. (B) In amphibians the blood that has picked up oxyg en in the gills and/or lungs returns 
to the heart, from which it is pumped into the systemic circulation.  Extensive mixing (purple) of 
the pulmonary and systemic lows occurs in the heart. (C) In rep tiles the pattern is much the same, 
except that the ventricles are partially divided, so less mixing takes  place. (D) In mammals and birds 
the two halves of the heart are efectively separated.
The heart of reptiles and all other amniotes practically functions as four chambered heart. There 
are two auricles in the heart of reptiles. The reptiles have incompletely  partitioned ventricle; but in 
crocodiles, the interventricular septum is complete and heart is four chambered. In all reptiles the 
left and right systemic arches carry oxygenated blood and arise from a region of ventricle called3614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1cavum venosum - into which left ventricle directs its blood. The deoxyg enated blood from the right 
atrium is directed towards the entrance of the pulmonary trunk whi ch is also located or starts from 
a pocket the cavum pulmonale, on right side of ventricle- in the anim als (reptiles) which do not have 
completely divided ventricle. Although the two systemic arches start from  the ventricle separately, 
they are also interconnected at their base by an opening. The heart of reptiles birds and mammals 
functions as double circuit heart.  (Fig. 14.19c).
In the birds and mammals, the heart is four - 
chambered, and oxygenated and deoxygenated 
blood does not mix at all. The pulmonary trunk 
arises from right ventricle and leads to the lungs.
The aortic trunk emerges from the left ventricle 
and leads to carotid and systemic arches. The left 
systemic disappears in birds and right systemic, 
most of it, disappears in mammals. (Fig. 14.19 
D).
In reptile, birds and mammals, as a result of 
these modiications, all blood returning to the 
right side of the heart passes to the lungs. After 
oxygenation, blood returns to left atrium from 
the lungs via pulmonary veins. Left atrium passes 
this blood to left ventricle - which on contraction 
pumps it to diferent parts of the body, and 
again blood returns to right atrium (Fig.14.18D). 
Pulmonary circulation  is by pulmonary arch 
carrying deoxygenated blood from right ventricle 
of heart to lungs, and the blood returns to left 
atrium after oxygenation via pulmonary veins.
Likewise the systemic arch distributes blood 
to diferent parts of the body, and then the 
blood from the body returns to the heart, in 
the right atrium via precaval and postcaval. 
This is systemic circulation . So the hearts of 
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals have 
both pulmonary and systemic circulation.
Fig. 14.19 The human circulatory system3714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1TRANSPORT IN MAN :
In humans, in addition to blood circulatory system, there is also another transport system, the 
lymphatic system, described latter in this chapter.
Blood circulatory system
The circulatory system of humans have the same 3 basic components.
(A) Circulating luid - the blood.
(B) The pumping organ - the heart.
(C) The blood vessels, arteries, capillaries and veins.
(A) The circulatory luid-the blood
The blood is the medium in which dissolved nutrients, gases, horm ones, and wastes are transported 
through the body. It is made up of two main components, (i) plasm a and (ii) cells or cell - like bodies 
(white blood cells, red blood cells, platelets). The weight of the blood  in our body is about 1/12th of 
our body.
(i) PLASMA :  It has been estimated that in a normal person plasma constitutes abou t 55% by 
volume of the blood, and cells or cell-like bodies about 45% by volum e of the blood.
Plasma is primarily water in which proteins, salts, nutrien ts and wastes are dissolved. Water 
constitutes about 90% of plasma, 10% are dissolved substances. Mos t of the dissolved substances 
are maintained at a constant or nearly constant level, but others occur  in varying concentrations. 
The substances dissolved or present in plasma vary in their concen trations, with the condition of 
the organism and with the portion of the system under examination. Th e solutes can be divided 
into six categories: 
Inorganic salts (ions) - Plasma proteins - Organic nutrients  - Nitrogenous waste products - Special 
products being transported and gases which are dissolved.
1. Inorganic ions or mineral ions.  Together the inorganic ions and salts make up 0.9 per cent 
of the plasma, of humans, by weight; more than two thirds of this  amount is sodium chloride the 
ordinary table salt. Even if the total concentration of dissolved substa nces remains the same, shifts3814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1in the concentration of particular ion can create serious disturban ces. The normal pH of human 
blood is 7.4; and it is maintained between narrow limits, becau se the change in pH would afect the
chemical reactions of the body.
2. The plasma proteins  constitute 7-9 percent by weight of the plasma. Most of these proteins 
are synthesized in the liver. Some of the globulins, called immunog lobulins or antibodies, are 
produced in response to antigens, by lymphocytes; and then are pas sed to plasma, and lymph.
The proteins like prothrombin acts as a catalyst in blood clotting process. Fibrinogen takes part in 
the blood clotting process. Immunoglobulins play important role in body’s defenses against disease.
3. Organic nutrients in the blood  include, glucose, fats, phospholipids, amino acids and 
lactic acids. Some of them enter the blood from the intestine (absorption) . Lactic acid is produced 
in muscles as a result of glycolysis, and is transported by blood to liver. Cholesterol is an important 
constituent, it is metabolized to some extent, but also serves as precursor of steroid hormones.
4. Plasma also contains nitrogenous waste  products formed as a result of cellular 
metabolism. These products are carried from the liver where they are p roduced, to the organs from 
where they are removed i.e. kidneys. Urea and small amounts of uric  acid are present in plasma.
5. All the hormones  in the body are carried by blood - so they are present in the plasm a.
6. The gases  such as CO2, O2 are present in the plasma of the blood.
Animation 14.10: Blood Circulatory system
Source & Credit: my-ecoach3914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
                  Fig.14.20 Red blood cells (erythrocytes ) and white blood cells (leucocytes) develop from stem cel ls in bone marrow.
 
(ii) BLOOD CELLS AND CELL LIKE BODIES :  These include red blood cells, (Erythrocytes), 
white blood cells (leucocytes) and platelets.
(a) Red blood cells (Erythrocytes) :  These are most numerous of the cells in the blood. A 
cubic millimeter contains 5-1/2 million of them in males, and  4-1/2 million in females. These cells, 
when formed, have nucleus, but it is lost before they enter the circula tory luid or blood. 95% of the 
cytoplasm of red blood cells is the red pigment, called haemoglobin  the remaining 5% consists of 
enzymes, salts and other proteins. The red cells once mature, do not d ivide.
Red blood cells are formed principally in the red bone marrow of short bones, such as the sternum, 
ribs and vertebrae (Fig. 14.20). In the embryonic life, they ar e formed in the liver and spleen. The 
average life span of red blood cell is about four months after whic h it breaks down and disintegrates 
in the liver and spleen - partly by phagocytes by phagocytosis ( Table -14.2)
(b) White blood cells (Leucocytes):  These blood cells are colourless, as they do not contain4014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1pigments. One cubic millimetre of blood contains 7000 to 8000 of them. They are much larger than 
the red blood cells. There are at least ive diferent types which can b e distinguished on the basis 
of the shape of the nucleus and density of granules in the cytoplas m (Table 14.2). They can be 
grouped into two main types, granulocytes and agranulocytes. Granu locytes, include neutrophils, 
eosinophils and basophils. They are formed in the red bone marrow  (Fig. 14.20). Agranulocytes are 
formed in lymphoid tissue, such as those of the lymph nodes, spl een, tonsils, adenoids and the 
thymus. Agranulocytes include monocytes and lymphocytes (B and T). Monocytes stay from 10- 20 
hours in the blood, then enter tissues and become tissue macrophages, performing phagocytic 
function (Fig. 14.24) Lymphocytes have life spans of months or even years; but this depends on the 
body’s need for these cells.
                                                             
Fig. 14.21 A macrophage in Action Fig. 14.22 The production of platelets
Animation 14.11: white blood cells
Source and Credit: gifsoup4114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
                                                                                          Fig. 14.23 Bl ood clotting
                                                                      
Animation 14.12: Blood Cells
Source & Credit: imgur4214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.14314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Leucocytes protect the body against foreign invaders, and use circul atory system to travel to the 
site of invasion. Monocytes and neutrophils travel through capillari es and reach the site of wound 
where bacteria have gained entry. Macrophages and neutrophils feed on bacterial invaders or 
other foreign cells, including cancer cells (Fig. 14.21). T hey typically die in the process, and their 
dead bodies accumulate and contribute to the white substance called p us, seen at infection sites.
Basophils produce heparin - a substance that inhibits blood cl otting. These also produce chemicals, 
such as histamine, that participate in allergic reactions and in responses to tissue damage and 
microbial invasion. Lymphocytes help to provide immunity against the disease.
(c) Platelets : These are not cells, but are fragments of large cells called megak aryoctyes (Fig. 
14.22). There is no nucleus in them. There is no pigment in them . Platelets help in conversion of 
ibrinogen, a soluble plasma protein, into insoluble form, ibrin . The ibrin threads enmash red 
blood cells and other platelets in the area of damaged tissue, ultima tely forming a blood clot. The 
clot serves as a temporary seal to prevent bleeding until the damaged tis sue can be repaired (Fig. 
14.23).
Functions of blood
The overall functions of blood in humans can be listed as follows :
i)   The plasma proteins maintain colloid osmotic pressure of the blood (75% by albumins, 25% by  
      globulins and almost none by ibrinogen).
ii)   Blood helps to transport materials, in the body including nutrients, water, salts and waste 
      products. All hormones are transported by blood from the endoc rine tissues to the target cells.
 
iii)  Gases O2 and CO2 are transported by blood.
iv)  Blood helps in body defenses against disease, neutrophils an d monocytes engulf and destroy  
      invading microorganisms e.g. bacteria.
v)   Blood provides immunity by the lymphocytes (pages 325-327).
vi)  Blood produces interferon, and antitoxins which are proteins, and protects our body from 
      nucleic acids and toxins of invading organism.4414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1vii)  Blood acts as a bufer to maintain the acid - base balanc e i.e. concentration of H+ and OH ions 
       of the body.
viii) Helps in maintaining the body temperature, concentration of wa ter and salts, thus helps in 
       homeostosis.
ix)    Wall of Blood helps in the exchange of materials between bl ood and body tissue through blood 
       capillaries via interstitial luid.
x)      Blood helps the body in maintaining the internal environm ent, by producing heparin, histamines, 
       and also maintaining the amounts of chemicals includ ing water and salts, in the body and  
       maintains body temperature to a constant or nearly constant l evels.
xi)   Helps in blood clotting process and seals the wounds, that stop entry of pathogens into body.
DISORDERS
There are certain disorders, related to the blood. Some of them are discu ssed below:
i) Leucaemia (Blood Cancer)
It is the result of uncontrolled production of white blood cells (leucoc ytes). This is caused by a 
cancerous mutation of a myelogenous or lymphogenous cell. The Leucaem ia is usually characteriszed 
by greatly increased numbers of abnormal white blood cells in th e circulating blood. Myelogenous 
cells (bone marrow cells) are in the bone marrow - and may spr ead throughout the body, so that 
white blood cells are produced in many other organs. These white bl ood cells are not completely 
diferentiated, and so are defective. Leucaemia may be of diferent types depending on the type 
of white blood cells, which are undiferentiated and being produced  at a faster, than normal rate.
There may be neutrophilic leucaemia, eosinophilic leucaemia, bas ophilic leucaemia, monocytic or 
lymphocytic leucaemia. It is a very serious disorder and the pati ent needs to change the blood 
regularly with the normal blood, got from donors. It can be cured by bone marrow transplant - 
which is in most cases efective, but very expensive treatment.
ii) Thalassaemia (G. Thalassa = The sea; haema = blood)
It is also called Cooley’s anaemia on the name of Thomas B. Cooley,  American pediatrician. It is a4514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1genetically transmitted haemoglobin abnormality. It is characteriz ed by the presence of microcytes, 
by spleenomegaly (enlargement of spleen) and by changes in the bon es and skin. The blood of 
these patients is to be replaced regularly, with normal blood. It ca n be cured by bone marrow 
transplant - which is very expensive - and does not give 100% cur e rate. Haemoglobin molecule in 
most cases, does not have ( b- chains in it, instead F.chain is present (F is foetal haemog lobin).
iii) Oedema
It means the presence of excess luid in the tissues of the body. The ex cess luid may be in the 
cells, or outside the cells. The intracellular oedema is caused by  osmosis of water into the cells, and 
cause, depression of metabolic systems (due to lack of nutrition and  O2 in the tissues) especially 
and the Na-pump.
The extracellular oedema may be the result of :
i)    Abnormal leakage of luid from the blood capillaries or f ailure of the lymphatic system to return  
     luid from the interstitial luid.
ii)  Oedma is caused by renal retention of salts and water. Oedem a disturbs the exchange and  
      concentration of minerals and ions in the blood and body c ells, afects blood pressure, increases 
     heart load etc.
(B) Pumping Organ - The Heart
Structure and action : The heart of humans is located in the chest cavity. The heart is enc losed in 
a double membranous sac - the pericardial cavity, which contai ns the pericardial luid. Pericardium 
protects the heart, prevents it from over extension.
The wall of the heart is composed of three layers.
(i)     Epicardium      (ii)    Myocardium      (iii)     Endocardium
Myocardium of the heart is made up of special type of muscles, th e cardiac muscles. 
These muscles contain myoibrils, and myoilaments of myosin and  actin. Their arrangement is 
similar to those in skeletal muscle ibres, and their mechanism of  contraction is essentially the 
same, except that they are branched cells, in which the successive cells are separated by junctions 
called intercalated discs. The heart contracts automatically with rhythmicity, under the control of 
the autonomic nervous system of the body.4614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                     Fig 14.24 The human heart and its valves and vessels. 
There are four chambers of the heart: two upper thin-walled atria, and two lower thick walled 
ventricles. Human heart functions as a double pump, and is res ponsible for pulmonary and systemic 
circulation. Complete separation of deoxygenated blood (Right side) an d oxygenated blood (left 
side), in the heart, is maintained. The right atrium receives deoxy genated blood via venae cavae 
from the body.
The blood is passed on to right ventricle through tricuspid valve (ca lled so because it has 3 laps). 
These laps are attached with ibrous cords called chordeae tendinae,  to the papillary muscles 
which are extensions of the wall of the right ventricle. When right ven tricle contracts, the blood is4714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
passed to pulmonary trunk, which carries blood via left and ri ght pulmonary arteries, to the lungs. 
At the base of the pulmonary trunk, semilunar valves are present. Af ter oxygenation in lungs the 
blood is brought by pulmonary veins to the left atrium, which pas ses this blood via bicuspid valve 
(called so because it has two laps) to the left ventricle. The laps of  bicuspid valve are similarly 
attached through chordae tendinae, to papillary muscles of the wall  of left ventricle. When the left 
ventricle contracts, it pushes the blood through aorta to all parts of th e body (except lungs). At the 
base of aorta semilunar valves are also present. The valves of the heart control the direction of low 
of blood. The wall of left ventricle is thicker (about 3 times) than that of the right ventricle. At the base 
of aorta, irst pair of arteries, 
the coronary arteries, arise, 
and supply blood to the heart. 
The aorta forms an arch, and 
before descending down gives 
three branches supplying 
blood to head, arms and 
shoulders. The aorta descends 
down in the chest cavity. It 
gives many small branches to 
the chest wall and then passes 
down to the abdominal region. 
Here it gives branches, which 
supply blood to diferent parts 
of alimentary canal, kidneys 
and the lower abdomen.
The aorta Bifurcates into iliac arteries, each of which leads to s upply blood to each legs. The blood from 
the upper part of the body is collected by diferent veins, which join  to form superior vena cava; which 
pass its blood to the right atrium. Two Iliac veins  are formed by veins which collect blood from legs, and 
unite to from inferior vena cava . It receives renal vein  from each kidney; and hepatic vein  from the 
liver, before it enters the right atrium. The liver receives hepatic portal vein  which is formed by many 
veins collecting deoxygenated blood with absorbed food from diferent par ts of  alimentary canal.  
The Cardiac Cycle
It is the sequence of events which take place during the completion of on e heart beat. Heart beat 
involves three distinct stages (Fig. 14.26).
Fig.14.25 The structure of cardiac muscle4814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.11. Relaxation phase - diastole.
The deoxygenated blood enters right atrium through vena cava, and oxyg enated blood enters left 
atrium through pulmonary veins. The walls of the atria and that of ventricles are relaxed. As the 
atria are illed with blood, they become distended and have more pressu re than the ventricles. This 
relaxed period of heart chambers is called diastole.
2. Atria Contract - atrial systole
The muscles of atria simultaneously contract, when the atria are i lled and distended with blood, 
this is called atrial systole. The blood passes through tricuspi d and bicuspid valves, into the two 
ventricles which are relaxed.
3. Ventricles contract - ventricular systole
When the ventricles receive blood from atria, both ventricles contract simu ltaneously and the blood 
is pumped to pulmonary arteries and aorta. The tricuspid and b icuspid valves close, and ‘lubb’ 
sound is made. Ventricular systole ends, and ventricles relax at the same time semilunar valves 
at the base of pulmonary artery and aorta close simultaneously, an d ‘dubb’ sound is made. (Lubb, 
dubb can be heard with the help of a stethoscope).
One complete heart beat consists of one systole and one diastole, and las ts for about 0.8 seconds. 
In one’s life, heart contracts about 2.5 billion times, without stopp ing.
Fig.14.26 The cardiac cycle4914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Mechanism of heart Excitation and Contraction
The heart beat cycle described above starts when the sino-atrial node ( Pace maker) at the upper end 
of right atrium sends out electrical impulses to the atrial muscles , and causing both atria to contract. 
The sino-atrial node consists of a small number of difusely ori ented cardiac ibres, possessing few 
myoibrils; and few nerve endings from 
the autonomic nervous system.
Impulses from the node travel to the 
musculature of the atrium and to 
an atrioventricular node. From it an 
atrioventricular bundle of muscle ibres 
propagates the regulatory impulses 
via excitable ibres in interventricular 
septum, to themyocardium of 
the ventricles. There is a delay 
of approximately 0.15 second  in 
conductance from the S-A node to A-V 
node, permitting atrial systole to be 
completed before ventricular systole 
begins (Fig. 14.28).
                                               
Fig.14.27 The heart’s pacemaker and its connections 
Animation 14.13: Heart pacemaker
Source & Credit: thevisualmd5014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Electrocardiogram
As the cardiac impulse passes through the heart, electrical curr ents spread into the tissues 
surrounding the heart, and a small proportion of these spread all  the way on the surface of the
A normal electrocardiogram (ECG) indicates that the heart is functi oning properly. The P wave
occurs just prior to atrial contraction; the QRS wave occurs just p rior to ventricular contraction
and the T wave occurs when the ventricles are recovering from contraction .
body. If electrodes are placed on the skin on opposite sides of the hear t, electrical potentials 
generated by these currents can be recorded. This recording is know n as electro cardiogram which 
is taken by electrocardiograph (E.C.G.) machine. It helps to dia gonose the abnormalities in the 
rhythmicity and conduction system of the heart which may be correc ted by the use of artiicial 
pacemaker.
Artiicial pace maker
Pacemaker is responsible for initiating the impulses which trig ger the heart beat rate. If there 
is some block in the low of the electrical impulses, or if the impu lses initiated by S.A. node are 
weak; it may lead to death of the individual. So an artiicial pa cemaker, which is battery operated 
producing electrical stimulus is used. For example if A-V pa thway is blocked, the electrodes of 
artiicial pacemaker are attached to the ventricle. Then this pacemaker  provides continued rhythmic 
impulses that take over the control of the ventricles.5114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
Blue babies
Failure of interatrial foramen (an opening in the inter-atrial sep tum) to close or of ductus arteriosus 
to fully constrict results in cyanosis (blueness of skin) of new  bom. This is due to mixing of blood 
between two atria and the mixed blood is supplied to the body of newborn  babies resulting in 
blueness of skin, thus the name blue babies.
(C) Blood vessels
The third component of the blood circulatory system of humans compris es of the blood vessels; 
arteries, capillaries and veins. 
(i) Arteries :  These are blood vessels which carry blood away from the heart to dif erent parts 
of the body. The wall of the arteries is made up of three layers, outer , (made of connective tissue 
and elastic ibres), middle (made of thick muscular tissue an d elastic ibres) and inner, endothelium 
(Table 14-3, and Fig 14.30). 
The contraction of the circular (smooth muscles) of arteries and ar terioles is under the control of 
nervous and endocrine systems. When stimulated the muscle contracts, constricting the arterioles 
(vasoconstriction) and thus reducing the low of blood in them. 
When the muscles are relaxed the arterioles are dilated (vasodilation) more blood lows in them, 
The arterioles themselves divide repeatedly until they form a dense network of microscopic vessels, 
called capillaries.
Atherosclerosis  (G. athere = porridge; skeleoris = hardening): It is coexisting atheroma and 
arteriosclerosis; atheroma is deposition of hard yellow plaque of li poid material in the inner most 
layer of the arteries, which may be due to high level of cholesterol in  the blood.Arteriosclerosis 
is a degenerative arterial change associated with advancing age. P rimarily a thickening of middle 
layer of arteries, and usually associated with some degree of atherom a. So Atherosclerosis causes 
narrowing and hardening of arteries. This increases the risk of formation of thrombus (see thrombus 
formation), and if thrombus is formed in the brain or heart it i s fatal. (Atherosclerosis is a major 
condition leading to heart attack.
(ii) Capillaries :  These are blood vessels with walls that are only one cell thick (Tab le 4.3, Fig. 14.29, 
14.30). Although the blood appears conined within the capillary  walls, the latter are permeable with 
the result, that water and dissolved substances pass in and out exc hanging oxygen, carbon dioxide 
dissolved food and excretory products with the tissues around capill ary. The capillary network is5214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1so dense that no living cell is far from a supply of oxygen and  food. In the liver, every cell is in 
direct contact with a capillary. The diameter of a capillary c an be altered by nervous stimulation, 
which tends to close them, and by chemicals, such as histamin e, which dilate them. The change in 
diameter is brought about by a change in the shape of the cells, constituting their walls. The pre 
capillary sphincters also regulate the amount of blood lowing in capillaries. Thus the amount of 
blood lowing in a certain tissue is controlled.
The capillaries are the sites where the materials are exchanged between  the blood and body tissues. 
This exchange occurs in three ways.
(i)    Active transport and difusion through the cells lining th e capillary wall into the interstitial or  
       extracellular luid, and then to the body cells, and vice versa. 
(ii)  Through the intercellular spaces of endothelial lining of wall of capillary to and from the  
       extracellular luid.
(iii) Materials from the cavity of capillaries are also taken up  by endocytosis, and then passed to 
       the other side by exocytosis. Same is true for some materials entering from the interceullar 
       spaces (extracellular luid) into the blood.
Thus the exchange of materials takes place between blood and tissues via extracellular or interstitial 
luid. Capillaries join to form venules, which join to form veins.  
(iii) Veins : These blood vessels transport blood from body cells towards heart. The wall of veins 
has same three layers as are present in arteries. But middle layer  is relatively thin and only slightly 
muscular, with few elastic ibres, (table 14.3 and Fig. 14. 30). The semilunar valves are present in the 
veins. These valves prevent the back low of blood, as it is moving toward s the heart. The pressure 
of surrounding muscles, when they contract, tends to squash the vein s and assist the return of 
blood towards heart. 
Veins join to form larger veins, and ultimately form venae cavae (In ferior vena cava and superior 
vena cava) which pour the blood into the right atrium of the heart. Th e oxygenated blood from the 
lungs is brought to the left atrium by pulmonary veins.5314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1           Fig.14.29 The exchange of gases and nutrients in a capill ary.
The pressure within capillaries causes a continuous leakage of luid from the blood plasma into 
the spaces that surround the capillaries and tissues. This lui d, known as interstitial luid consists 
primarily of water, in which the dissolved nutrients, hormones ga ses, wastes, and small proteins 
from the blood are present. Large proteins red blood cells and platelets  cannot cross the intercellular 
spaces of capillary wall, so they remain within capillaries . But some white blood cells can squeeze 
out through the intercellular spaces of capillary wall. Interstiti al luid is the medium through which 
the exchange of materials between the blood and nearby cell occurs. ( Fig. 14.29)5414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   Fig.14.30 Showing the comparison in structure of artery, cap illary and vein.
Animation 14.14: Structure of artery
Source & Credit: my-ecoach5514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Table 14.3 Comparison in structure and function of an artery, capillary and vein
Arteries Veins Capillaries
1.  These transport blood away   
      from the heart to the various 
      parts of the body through  
      capillaries.1.  These collect blood from 
      body through capillaries and  
     transp ort it towards heart.1. These link arteries with veins.
2.   All arteries carry oxygenated 
      blood except pulmonary  
      arteries.2.  All veins carry deoxygenated 
     blood except pulmonary 
      veins.2.  These have mixed oxygenated 
     and deoxygenated blood.
3.  There are no valves in them    
      except at the base of 
      pulmonary trunk and aorta.3.  Valves are present. These 
     prevent the back low of 
     blood.3. There are no valves.
4.  Have high blood pressure. 4.  Have low blood pressure. 4.  Fal ling pressure in these.
5.   Wave of blood pressure or 
      pulse due toheartbeat can 
      be detected.5.  No pulse. 5.  No pulse.
6.  Blood low rapid. 400-500mm 
      per second in aorta and 
      decreasing in arteries and 
      arterioles.6 . Rate of blood low increases 
     from smaller to larger veins.6.  Blood low slowest less than 
    1 mm per second.
7.  Have smaller bore and thick 
      wall.7.  Have larger bore and thin 
      walls.7.  Larger bore; wall one cell in  
     thickness.
8.  Thick muscle layer and elastic 
      ibres present. The elasticity 
      helps changing the pulsating 
      low of blood.8.  Thin muscle layer and less 
     elastic ibres. So they are less 
     elastic.8.  No muscles or elastic ibres.
9.  No exchange of materials. 9.  No exchange of materials. 9.  R esponsible for exchange of 
     materials.
Blood Pressure and Rate of low of Blood
It is the measure of force with which blood pushes up against the walls of blood vessels. It is 
the force that keeps blood lowing from the heart to all the capillary n etworks in the body. This 
pressure is generated by the contraction of ventricles (ventricle systole) and is the highest in aorta, 
then gradually reduces in arteries. The walls of arteries are ela stic and the low of blood stretches 
them, and it is felt as pulse. During diastole, the relaxation pha se of the cardiac cycle, the heart is 
not exerting pressure on the blood in the arteries and pressure in them falls. The pressure reaches5614. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1its high point during systole (systolic pressure which in norm al individuals is 120 mm Hg) and its 
low point during diastole (diastolic pressure which in normal individuals ranges between 75-85 
mm Hg). The blood pressure gradually declines (Fig. 14.31) . The decline of the blood pressure in 
successive parts of systemic circuit, is the result of friction betw een the lowing blood and the walls 
of the blood vessels - thus blood moves from a region of higher pressur e towards a region of lower 
pressure.
Several other changes occur along the route of blood low.
i) The diference between systolic and diastolic pressure continues to diminish until it disappears 
in the capillaries and veins.
ii) The rate of blood low tends to fall as the blood moves through the br anching arteries and 
arterioles, the rate is lowest in the capillaries; and increases ag ain in the venules and veins. These 
changes in rate of blood low result from changes in the total cross sectional area of the vessel 
system. The low of blood in veins is maintained by the contraction of  surrounding muscles and the 
action of semilunar valves which prevent back low of blood. Muscul ar activity including breathing 
movements help normal low of blood in the body.
Fig.14.31(a) graph of blood pressure in diferent parts of the hu man circulatory system.5714. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig.14.31 (b)Change in the velocity of blood low in the variou s parts of a systemic circulatory pathway.
Hypertension
It is a condition of high blood pressure. Prolonged high blood pr essure damages the lining of the 
blood vessels and also leads to weakening of heart muscles (which have become thickened due 
to the continuous strain imposed on them), with declining eiciency of  the pumping action of the 
heart. Blood may then be retained in the heart and lungs, often leadi ng to fatal condition called 
congestive heart failure.
Thrombus Formation and Hypertension
Thrombus is a solid mass or plug of blood constituents 
(clot) in a blood vessel. This mass may block (wholly 
or only in part) the vessels in which it forms, or it may 
be dislodged and carried to some other location in 
the circulatory system, in which case it is called an 
embolus. Thrombosis is the formation of thrombus 
(Fig. 14.32). Thromboembolism is leading cause of 
deaths in western civilization.
14.32 A thrombus in a small blood vessel. The thrombus (ta ngled red 
mass) has blocked blood low near a point where the vessel branches. 
The blood has pulled away from the left end of the thrombus a nd is 
beginning to pull away from the right end also.5814. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Thrombus formation may be due the following:
i)    Irritation or infection of lining of blood vessels.
ii)   Reduced rate of blood low, due to long periods   
      of inactivity. 
iii)  Pneumonia and tuberculosis, emphysema
Heart attack (Myocardial infarction)
Blockage of blood vessel in the heart by an embolus  (or by locally  formed thrombus) causes necrosis 
or  damage to portion of heart muscles, a condition  known as a hea rt attack or technically myocardial 
infarction, Heart attack is due to disruptions of control system of  the heart with accompanying 
arrhythmias, especially ventricular ibrillation.
We can avoid the above mentioned situations if we :
i)   Avoid too much fatty food (especially rich in cholesterol). Ma intain normal body weight.
ii)  Control blood pressure by regular walk and exercise.
iii) Do not smoke.
Stroke
If the normal low of blood is blocked by an embolus (or a locall y formed thrombus), in a blood 
vessel in the brain, and causes necrosis, or death, of the surroun ding neural tissue (owing to lack 
of O2), the condition is called a stroke or cerebral infarction. The sy mptoms of the stroke vary 
depending on the part of the brain that has been damaged.
Haemorrhage
It is the discharge of blood from blood vessels. Especially importa nt is the brain haemorrhage which 
results from bursting of any of the arteries supplying the brai n. When the wall of the arteries becomes 
hard and loses its elasticity - and higher blood pressures woul d result in brain haemorrhage. To 
avoid brain haemorrhage, the blood pressure must be controlled between n ormal limits.
In almost all the above mentioned problems, it is important to take follow ing preventive measures :
•    Taking in of less cholesterol in our food. Maintenance of norm al blood pressure.
•    Do not become over weight.
•    Do not smoke.
•  Do regular exercise.
•    Avoid stress and tension.5914. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1L YMPHATIC SYSTEM
This system is responsible for the transport and returning of mater ials from the tissues of the body 
to the blood.
The system comprises lymph capillaries, lymph vessels, lymph oid masses, lymph nodes, and lymph -
the luid which lows in the system. 
Lymph capillaries end blindly in the body tissues, where pres sure from the accumulation of 
interstitial luid or extracellular luid forces the luid into the ly mph capillaries. When this luid 
enters the lymph capillaries, it is called lymph. The lymph vessels empty in veins; so lymph is a luid 
in transit between interstitial luid and the blood. 
The intercellular spaces in the walls of lymph vessels are larg er than those of the capillaries of blood 
vascular system. So larger molecules, from the interstitial luid c an also enter the lymph capillaries.
Lymph capillaries join to form larger and larger lymph vessel s; and ultimately form thoracic lymph 
duct, which opens into subclavian vein. The low of lymph is al ways towards the thoracic duct. 
In the intestine, the branches of lymph capillaries, within vill i, are called lacteals.
The low of lymph is maintained by :
Activity of skeletal muscles, movement of viscera, breathing movements and  the valves, which 
prevent back low of lymph.
Along the pathway, the lymph vessels have, at certain points, masses  of connective tissue where 
lymphocytes are present; these are lymph nodes . Several aferent lymph vessels enter a lymph 
node, which is drained by a single, eferent lymph vessels.
Lymph nodes are present in the neck region, axilla and groin of humans.
In addition, several lymphoid masses are present in the walls of digestive tract, in the mucosa and 
submucosa. The larger masses spleen and thymus, tonsils and adenoids are all lymphoid masses. 
These produce lymphocytes.6014. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
    Fig. 14.33 Human lymphatic system.6114. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1There are the several functions performed by lymphatic system.
i)      In an average person, about three litres more luid leaves the blood capillaries than is 
         reabsorbed by them each day. It returns this excess lu id and its dissolved proteins and other  
        substances to the blood.
ii)     The lacteals of villi absorb large fat globules, whic h are released by interstitial cells after the 
        products of digestion of fats are absorbed. After a fatty meal these fat globules may make 
        up 1% of the lymph.
iii)   The lymphatic system helps defend the body against foreig n invaders. Lymph nodes have 
        lymphocytes and macrophages that destroy bacteria and vi ruses. The painful swelling of
        lymph nodes in certain diseases (mumps is an extreme example) is largely a result of the 
        accumulation of dead lymphocytes and macrophages.
iv )    Just as the lymph nodes ilter lymph, the spleen ilters bl ood, exposing it to macrophages and 
        lymphoctyes that destroy foreign particles and aged red b lood cells.
IMMUNITY - AND ITS TYPES
Immunity
The capacity to recognize the intrusion of any material foreign to the body and to mobilize cells 
and cell products to help remove the particular sort of foreign materia l with greater speed and 
efectiveness” is called immunity .
In animals in addition to physical barriers (skin + mucou s membranes) and phagocytes, there is a 
third mechanism, to defend their bodies against the foreign 
invaders; this is the immune system .
The components of immune system include the lymphocytes 
(B and T) and the antibodies - which are special type of protein s. 
These antibodies are immunoglobulins which are synthesized 
by vertebrates, in response to antigens;  and immobilise it, or 
sets in motion events that ultimately cause its destruction.Lymphocyte T and B have been named due 
to their relationship with Thymus gland, and 
Bursa of Fabricius respectively. The inluence 
of the thymus gland essential in making 
T-cells immunologically competent.Bursa of 
Fabricius is lymphoid structure present in 
the wall ofcloaca of young birds from where 
B-lymphoctyes were discovered to have role 
in immune system.6214. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Antigen or immunogen  is a foreign substance, often a protein which stimulates the forma tion 
of antibodies (Fig. 14.34) Antibodies  are speciic i.e. cause the destruction of the antigen, which 
stimulated their production. Antibodies  are manufactured in B-lymphocytes , then
secreted in to the lymph and blood where they circulate freely.
Fig. 14.34 (a) An antibody molecule consists of four polypept ide chains - two identical light chain and two identica l heavychains - linked 
by disulide (- S - S -) bridges. Variable amino acid seque nces (V) in the light chains and upper regions of the heav y chains determine 
which antigen will bind to that particular antibody. Const ant amino acid sequences (C) are the same for all the ant ibodies in one class 
(b) Large antigen-antibody complexes will form if there are mult iple copies of the antigenic molecule on the foreign cell’s s urface.
T-cells recognize antigen, then combat micro-organisms and / or efect the rejection of foreign 
tissues (in case of tissue transplant). This is called cell-mediated response.
B-cells recognize antigen and form plasma cell clone. These pla sma cells synthesise and liberate 
antibodies into the blood plasma and tissue luid. Here antibodies a ttach to the surfaces of bacteria 
and speed up their phagocytosis, or combine with and neutralise tox ins produced by micro-
organisms, by producing antitoxins. This is called humoral Immune response.
When we get vaccination, against a speciic disease (antigen), we become immune to that infection 
or disease. If we get vaccination against, polio, smallpox, measl es, mumps etc., once in our life time, 
we are protected or become immune to that infection in our future life.6314. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
Types of immunity
Active Immunity : The use of vaccines, which stimulate the production of antibodies in  the body, 
and making a person immune against the disease or infection, is  called active immunity.  But this 
active immunity has been achieved by artiicially introducing, a ntigens in the body, so it is called 
artiicially induced active immunity.  
But, when a person is exposed to an infection (antigen) - becomes il l, and in 
most cases survives then this immunity, developed against that disease is called 
naturally induced immunity or auto immune response.
Passive immunity : In contrast to active immunity, in which case antigens are introdu ced to 
stimulate the production of antibodies, by artiicial or natural meth od; antibodies are injected in 
the form of antisera, to make a person immune against a disease,Th is is called passive immunity.
In body, antigen - antibody complexes are formed which are taken up by phagocytes and destroyed. 
The patient is spared the complications (or possibly death) caused  by the infection or venom. 
Passive immunity response is immediate, but not long lasting. Beca use no time is taken for the 
production of suicient level of antibodies, (as antibodies are being injected) and after the level of 
antibodies is reduced or they are used up - No more antibodies produ ction is there.
The method of passive immunization 
is used to combat  active infections of, 
tetanus, infectious hepatitis, rabies, snake 
bite venom etc. In the case of snake bite  
venom passive immunity is produced by the 
antitoxins so the serum is called antivenom 
serum.
   
                                                                        AIDS  (Acquired Immune Deiciency Syndrome;
is a disease caused by a virus. The afected persons su fer from 
deiciency in their immun system of the body, and the im mune system 
collapses. Thus the AIDS  victim often succumb to a bacterial disease 
or cancer, that under normal circumstances, the immune sys tem can 
over come. There is no known cure of the disease. It can spre ad by 
blood transfusion and by sexual contact with the infected p ersons.Antiserum is a
serum containing
antibodies.6414. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q .1      Fill in the blanks :
              (i)      In the process of facilitated difusi on, the carrier molecules are.............................. ........
 
              (ii)     Pure water has a water potential whic h is equal to .....................................
              (iii)   The insects which feed on the phloem of plants are the ................................
              (iv)   The substance produced by basophils w hich inhibits blood-clotting is ......................... ...
              (v)    The most abundant compound of blood plas ma of man i s .........................
              (vi)     ........................ in 1 874 suggested that water molecules move along the cells walls of 
                       xylem vessels due to imbibition.
    
Q.2.    Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘false’ and w rite the correct statement if it is 
           false.
            (i)        The intercellular openings in the bl ood capillaries are larger than the openings in the 
                       lymph capillaries.
             (ii)       Between the left auricle and the left ventr icle in human heart, the valve present is 
                        called tricuspid valve.
             (iii)       The pacemaker of the heart of man i s the AV node.
             (iv)       Each sieve tube member is associated w ith one or more tracheid cells.
              (v)        The method of active immunization is used to combat active infections of tetanus and 
                       rabies.6514. Transport eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Q.3.     Extensive Questions
(i)         How are minerals and water taken up by roots? Draw  the structures involved and the  
            pathways for water and minerals from soil water to xylem, and the transport processes at 
            each step.
(ii)        Describe the mechanism of opening and closing of s tomata.
(iii)       How does the pressure-low theory explain the movement of su gars through a plant?
(iv)       Describe cohesion-tension theory of water movement in xylem. W hat supplies the cohesion, 
             and what is the source of tension? How do these two for ces interact to move water through 
             plant,
(v)        Explain, apoplast, symplast and vacuolar pathwa ys, and describe the movement of water 
            and dissolved minerals, through them.
(vi)       Explain water potential. What is the relationship of w ater potential with solute potential and 
            pressure potential?
(vii)      Name and describe the general functions of the three maj or type of cells or cell like bodies  
            found in blood of humans. Which of these cell typ es is found predominantly in lymph?
(ix)       Write a note on immunity and its types.