15. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CHAPTER
5 Variety of Life
Animation 5: Virus
Source & Credit: whyiles25. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Over one and a half million species of animals and over a half  million species of plants are known. 
To deal with such a large collection of dissimilar forms, certa inly we need some system by which 
species can be classiied in a reasonable way. Many types of c lassiications are possible. We could , 
for example , classify lowering plants according to their colour , height, or any other character. This 
type of classiication is not meaningful since it does not provide an y information about the basic 
diferences and similarities among diferent individuals.
All organisms are related to one another at some point in their  evolutionary  histories . However, 
some organisms are more closely related than others. Sparrows are m ore closely related to pigeons 
than either to the insects. Classiication is based on relationship a mongst individuals, that is, similarity 
in form or structure. Biologists have classiied all living thing s into groups showing similarities, 
based upon homologies, comparative biochemistry, cytology and genetics . Large groups are divided 
into smaller groups upto species level. “A species is a group of natural population which can 
interbreed freely among themselves and produce fertil e ofsprings, but are reproductively 
isolated from all other such groups in nature”.  However “interbreeding” cannot be used as 
a criterion for species recognition among predominantly asexually  reproducing organisms. Each 
species possessed its own distinct structural, ecological and beh avioral characteristics, hence 
species are independent evolutionary units. Diferent species do not exchan ge genes between 
them. Since long the living things are divided in two kingdoms: plants  and animals.  Next each 
kingdom is divided into smaller groups called phyla (also d ivisions for plants, algae and fungi). 
A phylum, in turn, is divided into classes,  classes into orders,  and an order into families . A family 
contains related genera,  and a genus is composed of one or more species.  Species is the basic 
unit of classiication. Conversely speaking, the organisms are gr ouped into larger, more inclusive 
categories (taxa), each category is more general than the one below i t and has emergent properties. 
The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom form a hierarchy a s described in the classiication 
of corn.35. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Members of a lower category resemble one another more than do the members of  a higher taxon.
NOMENCLATURE
From the earliest times plants and animals have been given common n ames by the people. Since 
no system was used in choosing common names, in many cases,  various regions had their own 
names for the same plant or animal . Take ‘Onion’ for example;  its common urdu name is ‘Piyaz’ but 
in diferent regions of Pakistan it is also known as ‘ganda’ or  ‘bassal’ or ‘vassal’. In diferent countries 
it would have another set of names. Similarly ‘amaltas’, ‘arg vad’, ‘gurmala’, ‘golden shower’, purging 
cassia’ are common names for the same plant. Thus the same plan t may have diferent names. In
some cases, a single name refers to several diferent plants or anima ls. What is ‘blue bell’? Dozen of 
plants with bell shaped lowers are called  ‘blue bells’ . Similarly the word ‘black bird’  would mean a 
crow as well as a raven.Common names have no scientiic basis. T o a biologist, a ish is a vertebrate 
animal with a backbone, ins and gills. But ‘silver ish’ i s an insect, and a ‘cray ish’, ‘jelly ish’ and 
‘starish’ do not it the biologist’s deinition of a ish.
Common names had long caused confusion. During the 18th century, Carlous Linnaeus (1707-1778), 
a Swedish botanist, devised a system for naming and classifyi ng all the organisms known to him. 
His system is used today internationally. He discarded the common names of plants  and gave 
each one a scientiic name. He took the scientiic name from Latin word . Linnaeus publishes the 
list of names of plants in 1753. The scientiic name of each pl ant had two parts. Usually, the name 
referred to some characteristics of the organisms or the person who collected it. His system spread 
rapidly and became so popular that he used it later on in namin g animals  and published his list in
1758. Many of his names are in use today.Biological classiication of Corn, Zea mays
                             Kingdom................ .................................... Plantae
                             Division (Phylum)........ .............................. Anthophyta (Tracheophyta)
                             Class ................ .......................................... Angiosperm ae
                             Order ................. ........................................ Poales
                             Family ............... ......................................... Poaceae
                             Genus ................. ....................................... Zea
                             Species ............... ....................................... mays45. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Linnaeus’s system of giving each species a scientiic name compr ising two words is known as 
binomial nomenclature.  The irst name refers to the genus  (p1. genera) and is called generic name 
and always begins with a capital letter. The speciic  name follows the generic name and begins with 
small letter. Scientiic name for onion is Allium cepa,  for amaltas Cassia istula  and for man Homo 
sapiens . Botanical name for potato is Solanum tuberosum  and for brinjal Solanum melangena . The 
same generic name for potato and brinjal relects close relationship between theses two-species. 
Every specie has only one scientiic name the world over. Initially th e classiication was based on 
the appearance or morphology  of plants and animals but with advancement in the knowledge 
of cytology, physiology, genetics and molecular biology the classi ication of organism has been 
modiied.
TWO TO FIVE KINGDOM CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS
Diferent classiication systems recognize two to six kingdoms. For cen turies , the living organisms 
have been classiied into two kingdoms, plants and animals . Plants can prepare their own food 
from simple inorganic material and store energy (autotrophs) , while animals can not synthesize 
their own food from simple inorganic material and depend for their  food either on autotrophs 
or on decaying organic matter  (heterotrophs) . Bacteria were included in plants. Many biologists 
found this system satisfactory, while others found it unworkable’ for many unicellular organisms 
like Euglena that have both plant like (presence of chlorophyll) an d animal like (lack of cell wall) 
characters and also because it ignores the diferences between prokary otic and eukaryotic cells. 
In 1866, Ernst Hackel proposed a third kingdom protista to accom modate Euglena like organisms 
and bacteria. In 1937, E-Chatton suggested diferentiating terms procariotique  (from Greek pro, 
meaning before, and karyon, meaning nucleus) used to describe bacteria and blue-green algae, 
and the term eu-cariotique  (from Greek eu, mean true) to describe animal and plant cells. S ome 
biologists also disagree about the classiication of fungi,  such as bread mold, yeast and mushrooms, 
which resemble plants in many ways but are not autotrophs. Fung i are special forms of heterotrophs 
that obtain energy and structural material by breaking down (decomposing)  and absorbing  food 
substances from the surroundings, and possess chitin as a ma jor structural component in their cell 
walls.
A relatively recent system of classiication, the ive kingdom system, w as proposed by Robert 
Whittaker (1969). This system of classiication shown in Fig 5.1 is based on three diferent levels of 
cellular organization associated with three principal modes of nu trition- photosynthesis,55. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1absorption  and ingestion.  The ive kingdoms proposed (i) the prokaryotic unicellular organi sms 
(Monera)  such as bacteria, (ii) the eukaryotic predominantly unicellul ar organisms (Protista)  such 
as Euglena  and  Amoeba , (iii) the eukaryotic multicellular autotrophs (Plantae),  (iv) the eukaryotic 
multicellular reducers (Fungi) for example mushrooms and (v)  the eukaryotic multicellular 
consumers (Animalia). Plants are autotrophic in nutritional mod e, making their own food by 
photosynthesis such as mosses, ferns, lowering plants. Fungi a re heterotrophic organisms that 
are absorptive in their nutritional mode. Most fungi are decomposers th at live on organic material, 
secrete digestive enzymes and absorb small organic molecules whic h are produced by digestion. 
Animals live mostly by ingesting food and digesting it within s pecialized cavities. They lack cellulose 
and show movements for example birds and reptiles. In ive kingdom classiication, all eukaryotes 
that did not it the deinition of plants, fungi or animalia were in cluded in Protista. Most Protists are 
unicellular forms, but this kingdom also includes relatively  simple multicellular organisms that are 
believed to be direct descendants of unicellular protists.
Lynn Margulis and Karlene Schwartz (1988) modiied ive king dom classiication of Whittaker by 
considering cellular organization , mode of nutrition, cytology, g enetic and organelles of symbiotic 
origin (mitochondria , chloroplast). These ive kingdoms are Prokaryotae  (Monera), Protoctista  
(Protists), Plantae, Animalia  and Fungi  (Fig 5.1).
                                                                
                                                                                Fig 5.1 Relationship of Fi ve kingdom65. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1               
           Fig. 5.2 Five kingdom classiication by Whitt aker75. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1VIRUSES
About a century ago at the time of Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) and Robert Koch (1843-1910), the 
word “virus” was generally referred to as a poison associated  with disease and death. The present 
notion of virus is entirely diferent. Now viruses are recognized as p articles of nucleic acid often with 
a protein coat. They replicate in living cells and cause many d iseases such as inluenza, hepatitis, 
small pox and AIDS. In this section the focus is on the properiies  of viruses and life cycle of bacterial 
viruses, also known as bacteriophages. Some diseases caused by vi ruses shall also be discussed in 
this section. The branch which deals with the study of viruses i s known as virology . 
The word virus is derived from Latin word venome  meaning poisonous luid. It can be deined as 
non cellular infectious entities which contain either RNA or DNA, n ormally encased in proteinaceous 
coat, and reproduce only in living cells. Viruses utilize the biosynthetic machinery of the host for its 
own synthesis and then transfer themselves eiciently to other cells.
Some viral diseases have been known for centuries. In fact, the irst infectious disease against 
which efective method of prevention was developed was a viral disease. In  1796, Edward Jenner 
irst vaccinated an 8 years old boy with material removed from cowpox  lesion on the hand of 
milkmaid. After six weeks the boy was inoculated with pus fr om a small pox victim, but he did 
not develop the disease. Later, Jenner used material for vaccination from  cowpox lesions and 
successfully vaccinated 23 persons. As the material he used wa s obtained from cow (latin vacca ), 
latter the term vaccination  was used by Louis Pasteur for inoculation against disease.
In 1884, one of Pasteur’s associates, Charles Chamberland, fou nd that bacteria can not pass through 
porcelain ilters, while agent responsible for rabies (a disease w hich is transferred to human by bites 
of rabid dogs, foxes, cats, bats and other animals) can pass  through these ilters. As in those days 
the word virus was loosely used to describe any toxic substance that caused disease, those unseen 
ilterable agents of disease were described as ilterable viruses. In 1892, Ivanowski discovered that 
the agent which caused tobacco mosaic disease was ilterable. He obta ined bacteria free iltrate 
from ground up infected plants and placed it on healthy leaves of tobacco. He observed that iltrate 
produced the disease in healthy plants. After that, presence of simi lar ilter-passing, ultramicroscopic 
agents was seen in the victims of many diseases, including foot a nd mouth disease (1898) and 
yellow fever (1901).85. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The ilterable agents were irst puriied in 1935, when 
Stanley was successful in crystallizing the tobacco mosaic 
virus . Chemical analysis of these particles showed 
that they contained only nucleic acid and protein. This 
suggested that, unlike other forms, viruses are of simple 
chemical composition.Bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria, were 
discovered independently by Twort in 1915 and 
D’Herelle in 1917. Twort observed that bacterial 
colonies sometimes undergo Lysis (dissolved and 
disappeared) and that this lysis can be transferred 
from one colony to other. Even highly diluted 
material from lysed colony can transfer the lytic 
efect. However, heating the iltrate destroyed 
its lytic property. From these observations he 
concluded that lytic agent might be a virus. D’Herelle 
rediscovered this phenomena in 1917 and used the 
word bacteriophages meaning “bacteria eater”. 
Animation 5.1: Virus
Source and Credit: geocities95. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Characteristics
Viruses are extremely small infectious agents, which can only  be seen under an electron microscope. 
They range in size from 250 nanometer (nm) of poxviruses to the 20  nm of parvoviruses. They are 
10 to 1000 times smaller than most bacteria, so they can pass thr ough the pores of ilter, from 
which bacteria cannot pass. Viruses cannot be grown on artiici al media. They can reproduce only 
in animal and plant cells or in microorganisms, where they reproduce by replication (a process by 
which many copies or replicas of virus are formed). Thus the viruses are obligate intracellular 
parasites . Viruses lack metabolic machinery for the synthesis of their ow n nucleic acid and protein. 
They depend on the host cell to carry out these vital functions. During  reproduction in the host 
cells, viruses may cause disease. All viruses are generally r esistant to broad range of available 
antibiotics such as penicillin, streptomycin and others.
Structure
The complete, mature and infectious particle is known as virion . The virions are composed of 
a central core of nucleic acid , either DNA or RNA, which is also known as the genome  and is 
surrounded by a protein coat, the capsid . Capsid gives deinite shape to virion. Capsid is made up 
of protein subunits known as capsomeres . The number 
of capsomeres is characteristics of a particular virus. 
For example 162 capsomeres are present in the capsid 
of herpes virus  and 252 in the capsid of adenovirus  
which cause some common colds. In some animal viruses 
the nucleocapsid  (nucleic acid and capsid) is covered 
by another membrane derived from the host cell, the 
envelope . Non enveloped viruses are known as naked 
virions. Animal and plant viruses may be polyhedron 
(having many sides), helical (Spiral), enveloped or complex.
Bacterio-phages occur in two structural forms having cubical or  helical symmetry. In general 
appearance cubical phages are regular solid or icosahedral  (having 20 faces), and helical phages 
are rod shaped. Many phages consist of head and tail. In those cases heads are polyhedral but 
tails are rod shaped. Morphology of some viruses and bacteriophages  has been shown in Fig 5.3.The most recently discovered (1983) and least 
upderstood micro organisms are the prions,  
which may be infectious proteins. Their nature is 
very controversial. They are composed of protein 
only that contains the information that codes 
for their own replication. All other organisms 
contain their genetic information in nucleic acid 
(DNA or RNA). Prions are responsible for mad 
cow infection and mysterious brain infection in 
man.105. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1  
Fig. 5.3 Diferent types of viruses
Life Cycle of Bacteriophages
Earlier researches on bacteriphages were mainly on limited numb er of phages that infect Escherichia 
coli. Of these the best known phages are T phages (T for type).
Among T phages, the T2 and T4 phages are mainly used in phage studies. The overall structure of 
T4, studied with electron microscopy, resembles that of tadpole, consisti ng of head and tail (Fig 
5.4). The head is an elongated pyramidal (having two triangul ar structures with common base), 
hexagonal , prism -shaped structure, to which straight tail is  attached. Within the head double 
stranded DNA molecule is present. The structure of phage tail is more complex than head. A layer 
of distinct protein forms the inner tube or core, which is enclosed i n sheath  made up of another 
type of protein. On one side of sheath is collar  and on other side is end plate. To end plate six tail115. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     Fig. 5.4 A Bacteriophage
ibers  are attached, which are the structures for attachment. The volume of th e phage is about 
1/1000 of the host.
The bacteriophage replicates only inside the bacterial cell. The ir st step in the replication of a 
bacteriophage is its attachment (adsorption)  to host cell at receptor site on the cell wall of 
bacterium. During attachment, week chemical union between virion an d receptor site  takes place. 
In the next step, penetration , the tail releases the enzyme lysozyme  to dissolve a portion of the 
bacterial cell wall. The tail sheath contracts and tail core is  forced into the cell through cell wall and
cell membrane. The virus injects its DNA into the cell just as the s yringe is used to inject the vaccine. 
The protein coat, which forms the phage head and tail structure of virus remains outside the cell 
(Fig 5.5). Many animal viruses, however enter the host cell as a whole.
Immediately after entering the host cell , the viral nucleic acid tak es the control of the host’s 
biosynthetic machinery and induces the host cell to synthesize neces sary viral components (DNA,   
proteins), and starts multiplying . About 25 minutes after initial infection, approximately 200 new125. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1bacteriophages are formed, bacterial cell bursts, i.e., it under goes lysis. Newly formed phages are 
released to infect the bacteria and another cycle, the lytic  cycle begins (Fig. 5.6). The phage which 
causes lysis of the host cell is known as lytic or virulent phage.
Fig 5.5 A phage injecting its DNA in to host
Animation 5.2: Viruses
Source and Credit: geocities.ws135. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Video 5.3: Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER),Ribosomes
Source and Credit: Sabaq
Animation 5.4: Life Cycle of Bacteriophages
Source and Credit: faculty.ccbcmd145. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 5.6 Replication of a bacteriophage. After adsorption and p enetration, the virus DNA undergoes prophage formation (1) In the  
Iysogenic cycle, phages can exist harmlessly as a prophage with in the host cell for long periods of time. Each ti.ne th e bacterial 
chromosome is replicated, the prophage also is replicated, an d hence all daughter bacterial cell are “infected”! with  the prophage. 
Induction involves either a spontaneous or environmentally i nduced excision of the prophage from the bacterial chromosome. (2)  A 
typical lytic cycle, involves synthesis and maturation  of phage and new phages are released.
All infections of bacterial cells by phages do not result in lys is. In some cases viral DNA, instead of 
taking over the control of host’s machinery, becomes incorporated into th e bacterial chromosome.
Phage in this state is called prophage  and this process is known as lysogeny.  In this condition 
the bacterium continues to live and reproduce normally. Viral DN A being the part of bacterial 
chromosome passes to each daughter cell in all successive generation s. Some times, however, the 
viral DNA gets detached from the host’s chromosome and lytic cycle s tarts. This process is called 
induction.  Lysogenic bacteria are resistant to infection by the same or related p hages. The phage 
which causes lysogeny is called temperate (lysogenic) phage .155. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Classiication of Viruses
Virus morphology and nucleic acid properties are most important f or classifying plant, animal and 
bacterial viruses. The genetic material may be DNA or RNA naked, enveloped or complex. On the 
basis of morphology viruses are classiied into rod shaped (T.M. V), spherical (poliovirus) and tadpole 
like bacteriophage viruses etc. Fig. 3.5 and 5.4.
Some Viral Diseases
There are many diseases which are caused by viruses. Only thos e are being mentioned here which 
have been or are common in Pakistan.
Small pox:  Smallpox, which is caused by pox viruses (the DNA enveloped vir us) is an ancient disease 
that is known to have occurred as epidemic in China as early as  the twelfth century B.C. Until the 
early twentieth century , small pox was a common disease throughout the world. In small pox, 
raised luid-illed vesicles are formed on the body which become pus tules later on and form pitted 
scars, the pocks . By 1950’s immunization and other control measures had largel y decreased the 
danger, but it is still present in the third world countries where many people are afected. In 1980, 
it was declared by World Health Organization that small pox ha s been eradicated from the world.
Herpes simplex:  Herpes virus (DNA virus) is responsible for this disease. It is  naturally occurring 
disease of mankind. In this vascular lesions in the epithelial layers of ectodermal tissues are formed. 
Most commonly this disease occurs in the mouth, on the lips, and a t other skin sites.
Inluenza:  Inluenza viruses are enveloped RNA viruses. Inluenza is wide sp read disease in man 
and occurs in epidemic form.
Mumps and Measles:  Mumps and Measles viruses belong to group paramyxoviruses . They are 
large, enveloped, RNA viruses. Mumps is highly contagious, wid e spread, but seldom fatal. About 
60% of adults are immune to it. Measles is one of the commonest diseas es of the childhood and 
adult human population is equally susceptible the world over. Th is disease develops immunity in 
its victim.
Polio:  Poliomyelitis, caused by polio virus, is found all over the world  . It occurs mostly in childhood.165. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The age at which primary infection occurs varies with social a nd economic factors. The polioviruses
are the smallest known viruses and contain RNA in spherical ca psid. Some common human viral 
dieases are shown in Fig 5.7.
Fig. 5.7 Some common human viral diseases
Retroviruses
RNA tumor viruses have been known for many years. These viruses ar e widely distributed in nature 
and are associated with tumor production in a number of animal species, such as fowl, rodents 
and cats. The most familiar of viruses is the human immunodeiciency virus (HIV)  which causes 
acquired immune deiciency syndrome (AIDS).
The single stranded RNA tumor viruses, which also include retroviruses (oncoviruses),  are 
spherical in form , about lOOnm in diameter and enveloped by h ost plasma membrane. Although 
a few retroviruses are non speciic that is they can infect any cell , most of them can infect only host175. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1cells that possess required receptors. In the case of AIDS virus, the host cell possesses a receptor 
that allows the viral adsorption and penetration in several types of leukocytes  (white blood cells) 
and tissue cells. The retroviruses have a special enzyme called  reverse transcriptase,  which can 
convert a single -stranded RNA genome into double stranded viral DNA.  Not only this DNA can 
infect host cells, but it also can be incorporated into host genome as  a provirus  that can be passed 
on to progeny cells. In this way, some of retroviruses can convert norm al cells into cancer cells.
Acquired Immune Deiciency Syndrome (AIDS)
The AIDS was reported by some physicians in early 1980’s in young males having one or more of 
complex symptoms such as severe pneumonia , a rare vascular can cer, sudden weight loss, swollen 
lymph nodes and general loss of immune functions. All these you ng patients were homosexuals. 
Soon after the disease was discovered in nonhomosexual patients who were given blood (blood 
transfusion) or blood products. In 1984 the agent causing the di sease was identiied by research 
teams from Pasteur Institute in France and National Institute of heal th in USA. In 1986 the virus was 
named as human immunodeiciency virus (HIV)  (Fig 5.8). The major cell infected by HIV is the 
helper T-lymphocyte , which is major component of immune system. As the HIV infection  continues 
in the host, the decrease of helper T-lymphocytes results in failu re of the immuhe system and the 
infected person becomes susceptible to other diseases. Cells in centra l nervous system can also be 
infected by HIV Fig. 5.9. Recent studies on HIV reveal that the viru s infects and multiplies in monkey 
but does not cause disease in them, which means that HIV is host speciic.
Fig. 5.8 Human immunodeiciency virus (HIV)185. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The HIV is transmitted by intimate sexual contact, contact with blood  and breast feeding. Healthcare 
workers can also acquire HIV during professional activities. A voiding the direct contact with HIV is 
important measure for preventing the disease. Prevention of’ intravenous d rugs with common 
syringes and use of sterile needles/syringes and utensils is im portant. Now vaccine against HIV has 
been synthesized and its experimental administration in humans  started in early 2001 in South 
Africa.
Fig 5.9 Infection cycle of HIV
Hepatitis
Hepatitis is an inlammation of the liver. It is usually caused by viral infection, toxic agents or drugs. 
It is characterized by jaundice, abdominal pain, liver enlar gement, fatigue and some times fever. It 
may be mild or can be acute and can lead to liver cancer. The d iferent types of viral hepatitis are 
Hepatitis A  (formerly called infectious hepatitis is transmitted by contact w ith faeces from infected195. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1individuals.) Hepatitis B  (serum hepatitis). Hepatitis C  (formerly called non-A, non-B hepatitis) 
passes through blood, from mother to child during pregnancy an d afterward and by sexual contact. 
Hepatitis D  (delta hepatitis), Hepatitis E  (a virus transmitted through the faeces of an infected 
person), Hepatitis F, G  (caused by viruses yet unidentiied). Viruses of hepatitis A, B and C are 
better known. Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is an RNA virus (non enveloped), which causes mild short 
term, less virulent disease. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is also RNA virus (enveloped) causes infusion 
hepatitis, which is less severe than hepatitis A or hepatitis B, b ut hepatitis C often leads to chronic 
liver disease. Most recent work of Halbur and coworker (2001) reveal s that pig could be the source 
of infection of hepatitis E.
Hepatitis B (HBV)  is the second major form of hepatitis. It is caused by DNA virus  which is very 
common in Asia, China, Philippines, Africa and the Middl e East. Hepatitis B is transmitted by the 
exchange of body luids, for example blood serum, breast milk an d saliva, from mother to child 
during birth or afterward and by sexual contact.. During acu te attacks of Hepatitis B fatigue, loss of 
appetite and jaundice are reported. Infected persons can recover compl etely and become immune 
to the virus. People with chronic hepatitis infection are at the risk  of liver damage. Hepatitis can be
controlled by adopting hygienic measures, with routine vaccination and screening of blood/ organ/ 
tissue of the donor.
Genetically engineered vaccine is available for HBV.
Vaccine is also available for HAV but not for HCV.
Animation 5.5: HIV
Source and Credit: makeagif205. Variety of Life eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Q.1.            Fill in the blanks
                    (i)         C. Linneaus divided all known forms of life i nto two kingdoms: _______ a n d ____.                                         
                                Bacteria were placed in the kingdom ________ because they have cell walls, and  
                                protozoa were placed in the kingdom ___________because they move from place 
                                to place and ingest food.  
                    (ii)        The most common system of c lassiication used today, developed in 1969 by 
                                        Robert Whittaker of Cornell University, uses ive kingdoms: _________ and_______ _.
                    (iii)       Whittaker’s ive kingdom s ystem of classiication recognizes two basic types of  
                                cells : __________ a nd _____________ .
                    (iv)       In ive kingdom system of cl assiication proposed by Margulis and Schwartz  
                                organelles of symbiotic or igin such a s an d _______ were also considered.
                    (v)        A bacteriophage reproduces b y using the metabolic machinery of______________.
                    (vi)       The protein coat that encloses th e viral genome is called :___________ It is made 
                                up of__________ .
                    (vii)      Retroviruses are __________ _ viruses which have speciic enzymes _______________
                                by which they convert RNA  to DNA.
                     (viii)      HIV infects _________ __ and the defects in these cells lead to failure in ___________ _ 
                                 system.
                    (ix)       Hepatitis is caused by ________ .
                    (x)        Viral Hepatitis is of __ _______types. Hepatitis A and C are caused by ___________ 
                                 virus whereas _______ __ virus is the causative agent of Hepatitis B.                                                                  EXERCISE