CHAPTER
9Kingdom Plantae
Animation 9.1: Kingdom Plantae
Source & Credit: storify29. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1    
  
During the past few decades biologists have been trying to classify  living organisms into various 
groups which could logically relect their similarities and di ssimilarities at various levels. The groups 
were supposed to foreshadow the natural relationships among living  organisms and their mode of 
origin. Such a system of classiication is called Phylogenetic System of Classiication.
Kingdom Plantae mainly includes eukaryotic, autotrophic, multic ellular, non motile organisms 
which develop from embryos. Plant cells have cell wall outer to cell membrane which is composed 
of cellulose. There are about 360,000 known species of plants.
CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTAE
For the sake of convenience organisms included in Plantae can be divided into two broad categories 
viz. non vascular (Bryophyta)  and vascular (Tracheophyta)  plants. Although this grouping is not 
according to any speciic system of classiication but it does relec t similarities and dissimilarities 
among various groups of plants. Each category (division) is di vided into Sub-divisions, Classes, Sub-
classes and other taxonomic ranks. Detailed discussion of classi ication of Plantae will be beyond 
the scope of this book. Following is a brief outline of classiicati on of Plantae.
                                     Table 9.1: An o utline of Classiication of Plantae39. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1    
DIVISION BRYOPHYTA
The irst plants to colonize land were the bryophytes. They are 
generally thought to have evolved from green algae.
The Bryophytes are poorly adapted to live on land and are mainly 
conined to damp shady places (Fig. 9.1). 
These plants are devoid of specialized conducting (xylem and 
phloem) and strengthening tissues. Only the process of difusion 
and osmosis helps in the transportation of water and minerals as 
well as in transportation of prepared food and other substances. 
The plant body is with a proper cuticle, or has a very thin one. 
The water is absorbed by the general surface of the plant. The 
bryophytes are said to be the amphibians of the plant  world 
because they cannot live away from water. They need water for 
reproduction (Fig. 9.2).
The bryophytes are non- vascular 
lowerless plants. These plants show a 
regular a lternation of heteromorphic 
(morphologically diferent) generations.  
They have a dominant independent free 
living gametophyte . This may be thalloid 
as in many liverworts or is diferentiated 
into structures resembling to stem, 
leaves and absorbing and anchoring 
organs, rhizoids , as in mosses and some 
liverworts. The gametophyte produces a 
sporophyte , which is a less conspicuous 
generation, partially or totally dependent 
upon the gametophyte for its nutrition. 
The sporophyte generally consists of foot, seta and capsule. The spor ophyte is diploid (2n) which 
produces in sporangia one kind of haploid spores (i.e. it is homosporous ) by meiosis.49. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
The spores germinate and give 
rise to gametophyte which is also 
haploid. Multicellular male and 
female sex organs i.e. antheridia  
and archegonia  respectively, are 
born on gametophyte either on same 
or diferent plants. These sex organs 
are multicellular and protected by a 
sterile covering of cells (Fig. 9.3).
Gametes are produced by mitosis. 
Male gametes produced within 
antheridia are called antherozoids ; 
antherozoids are motile and always 
produced in large number. Female 
gametes formed within archegonia 
are termed as eggs . A single egg 
is formed in each archegonium. 
Fertilization takes place in water. 
Antherozoids (n) are attracted 
towards archegonia (n) chemotactically. A single antherozoid fus es with an egg (n) thus accomplishing 
fertilization which results in the formation of the diploid zygote (2 n). The zygote is retained within the 
female sex organ (archegonium) for some time. After a resting period  the zygote develops through mitotic 
divisions into a diploid embryo . The embryo ultimately develops into a sporophyte which is also dip loid.
The entire development of sporophyte thus takes place within the gametophyte p lant body. Even 
when the sporophyte is fully developed it remains attached to the gametophy te for nourishment 
and protection because it does not contain chloroplasts and is unabl e to perform photosynthesis. 
There is an alternation of generations  in the life cycle of bryophytes i.e. multicellular haploid 
gametophytic (gamete producing) generation alternates with the multicell ular diploid sporophytic 
(spore producing) generation (Fig. 9.6). It is a very important phenomenon, which provides 
continuous genetic variabilities and selection for the best genetic make up for survival and 
adaptation in the changing environment(s) (as explained in a la ter section).
In view of the above mentioned discussion, bryophytes can therefore be dei ned more precisely as 
plants with the distinguishing characters as follows :59. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
 ’’Vascular system absent; gametophyte dominant; sporoph yte attached to gametophyte; 
homosporous.”
  
ADAPTATION TO LAND HABITAT
In general bryophytes developed the following adaptive characters for ter restrial environment:
1.  Formation of a compact multicellular plant body which help ed in the conservation of water by  
     reducing cell surface area exposed to dry land conditions.  Presence of cuticle further reduces   
     loss of water by evaporation.
2.  Development of photosynthetic tissues into special chambers for the ab sorption of carbon 
     dioxide without losing much water and exposure to light.
3.  Formation of special structures like rhizoids for absorption of water and anchorage. 
4.  Heterogamy (production of two types of gametes) is evolved, forming n on motile egg containing  
     stored food and motile sperms.
5.  Gametes are produced and protected by the special multicellular organs (antheridia and  
     archegonia).
6.  Multicellular embryo is formed which is retained and protec ted inside the female reproductive  
     body during its development.
7.  Alternation of spore-producing generation (sporophyte) with gamete producing generation 
     (gametophyte) enabled the plant  to produce and test the best genetic combinations for adapting 
     to the versatile terrestrial conditions.
CLASSIFICATION
 
Bryophytes are divided into three subdivisions : Hepaticopsida, Bry opsida and Anthoceropsida.69. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Hepaticopsida (Liverworts) 
Bryophytes belonging to this subdivision are called liverworts. It i ncludes about 900 species. 
Liverworts are the simplest of all bryophytes (Fig. 9.4). 
They are usually found on moist rocks and on wet soil. Since they  live near water therefore chances 
of drying out are greatly reduced.
The plant body is a gametophyte. It may be thalloid i.e. lat, or r ibbon-like, usually dichotomously 
branched. It is attached to soil by means of rhizoids e.g. Marchantia , Other species tend to grow 
upright and are falsely leafy i.e., diferentiated into a false s tem, and leaves e.g., Porella (Fig. 9.4b). 
The sporophyte is dependent upon gametophyte! for nourishment and protecti on.
The sex organs develop on the upper surface of the thallus near the tip s of the branches. 
Sometimes they develop on special branches on gametophyte called the antheridiophores  and 
the archegoniophores  as in Marchantia  (Fig. 9.5).79. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 9.5 A Liverwort, Marchantia bearing sex organs, antheridia  and archegonia, on special branches called antheridiophores  and 
archegoniaphores:
Fig. 9.6 A generalized life cycle of a Bryophyte showing alte rnation of generation.89. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
Bryopsida  
Like liverworts most mosses inhabit damp 
places. In contrast to other bryophytes they grow 
equally well in fairly dry places. However, water 
is essential in the reproduction of mosses, thus 
they usually grow to form cushions or mats.
Each adult moss plant, a gametophyte, is always 
diferentiated into structures which resemble 
stem and leaves. Multicellular rhizoids are also 
present. Examples of mosses are Funaria   and 
Polytrichum  (Fig. 9.7). Archegonia and antheridia, 
develop on the tips of diferent branches on the 
same plant e.g., Funaria , or on diferent plants 
as in Polytrichum . The archegonia and antheridia 
form clusters and are mixed with sterile hairs, 
the paraphyses .
Formation of diploid sporophyte and haploid 
spores follow the same sequence of events of 
alternation of generations as in liverworts (Fig. 
9.6). However, the spore of a moss, unlike that of 
liverworts, develops into an alga like structure, the 
protonema . Haploid moss plants (gametophyte) 
develop from buds on the protonema and the 
life cycle is completed (Fig. 9.8).99. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1         Fig. 9.8 Moss life cycle
Anthoceropsida (Horn Worts) 
This group of bryophytes difers in many respects and is slig htly advanced than Bryopsida and 
Hepaticopsida. The gametophyte is highly lobed and irregular in  outline. Except for a little early 
stage of development, the sporophyte is not dependent upon gametophyte for nou rishment 
and protection. Antheridia and archegonia are partially sunken in the gametophytic tissue. 
The sporophyte exhibit many advanced characters due to which it ca n thrive better on land as 
compared to other groups. The sporophyte has stomata and chloroplasts in the epidermis and can 
thus photosynthesize its own food rather than obtaining it from gametoph yte. It also has a waxy 
cuticle to check excessive loss of water (desiccation). Furthermore, at the junction of foot and spore 
producing region there is a band of meristematic  tissue. This tissue keeps on adding cells towards 
the spore-producing region during the formation, maturation and di spersal of spores from the 
opposite end. Due to the fast growth rate of this meristematic tissue the spor ophyte keeps on109. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1increasing in length for an indeinite period of time. Due to these cha racters the sporophyte 
continues to survive as such even after the death and decay of the gametoph yte. One good example 
of Anthoceropsida is Anthoceros which is also found in the hilly  areas of Pakistan (Fig. 9.9)
Fig. 9.9 Anthoceros, a hornwort (a) Gametophyte with attache d horn-shaped sporophyte (b) V.S. of sporophyte.
Alternation of generations
In the life history of liverworts, mosses and hornworts there are two di stinct multicellular phases 
or generations. These generations are haploid gametophyte  and diploid sporophyte , which 
regularly alternate with each other. The gametophyte is the dominant gen eration because it is more 
conspicuous. It produces gametes called spermatozoids  or antherozoids  and eggs, therefore 
called gamete-producing generation. A haploid spermatozoid fuses w ith a haploid egg to produce 
diploid oospore .
The oospore does not produce the gametophyte directly but produces a totally diferent plant 
called sporophyte . The sporophyte in bryophytes is a less conspicuous generation, w hich is usually 
diferentiated into foot , seta  and capsule  (also called sporogonium ). Spores develop within the 
capsule by reduction division (meiosis) from spore mother cells. T he sporophyte produces spores 
and is, therefore, called spore producing generation. The spore on g ermination does not develop119. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1into a sporophyte but gives rise to the gametophyte. Thus in the life-his tory of a bryophytic plant, 
the two generations, the gametophyte and the sporophyte, regularly alternate with each other. The 
phenomenon of alternation of gametophyte and sporophyte in the life histor y of a plant is called 
alternation of generations (Fig. 9.10).
It should be noted that the gametophyte or haploid stage begins with spor es and ends at gametes, 
whereas the sporophyte begins with oospore and ends at spore mother cell.
The signiicance of alternation of generations
During the formation of spores from spore mother cells by meiotic divis ion reshuling of genes 
occurs. As a consequence, a great variety of spores with diferent gen etic make-up are produced. 
These spores in turn produce gametophytes with diferent genetic combina tions. The gametophytes 
with better genetic make-up will have a better chance for survival in the environment where 
they occur. On the other hand, the gametophytes with less advantageous c haracteristics will be 
eliminated. There is no reshuling of genes during gametogenesis in  the gametophyte as gametes 
are produced after mitosis.
The oospore developing after fertilization now has a new genetic make-up  as compared to the129. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
parent. This genetic variation passes to the new sporophyte which on m aturity once again produces 
further genetic recombination which are transferred to the gametophyte. I n this natural process 
the sporophyte thus provide a large amount of genetic variability and  nature selects the best 
genetic combinations. In the long run, this will allow the popula tions to become increasingly better 
adapted to their environment.
DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA
Tracheophytes are called vascular plants because of the presence of vascular tissues i.e. xylem and 
phloem.These are the successful group of land plants. They are a ble to adapt the rough land habitat 
most successfully and amongst them the lowering plants today have d ominated land habitat. The 
evolution of following complex vegetative and reproductive characteristic s enabled the vascular 
plants in general and lowering plants speciically to become pred ominant lora of land :
1.       Root, stem and leaves.
2.       Vascular systems in stems, roots and leaves.
3.       Protected sporangia, leading to the evolution of seed.
4.       Pollen tube for safe and water-independent transmission of male gamete to female gamete.
5.       Flower and fruit.
6.       Heteromorphic alternation of generation.
The Tracheophytes are further sub-divided into four sub-divisions,  Psilopsida, Lycopsida, 
Sphenopsida and Prteropsida.
PSILOPSIDA (PSILOPHYTA)
In Psilopsida plants have rootless sporophytes. The stem is diferenti ated into an underground 
rhizome  and an aerial part. Both are dichotomously  branched. The rhizome bears rhizoids, 
both perform the function of root. The aerial branches are green, leal ess and bear small veinless 
outgrowths and carry out photosynthesis. The reproductive organs of sp orophyte are sporangia  
which develop at the tips of long or short branches, or on lateral si des of branches (Fig. 9.11).139. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Internal structure of stem is simple. Vascular tissue is narrow , central and soild without pith, with 
a broad cortex.
Psilopsida is considered to be the earliest group of vascular plan ts. Most of the representatives of 
this group have become extinct, for example, Horneophyton, Psilophyton, Cooksonia  (Fig. 9.11) 
etc.
Fig. 9.11 Psilotum
(a) Dichotomously lealess branches.
(b) The erect branches of another species, showing brown sporan gia.
There are only two living genera Psilotum , and Tmesipeteris .
The gametophyte is thalloid. It is colorless and underground. Its cells contain a fungus which 
provides food to the gametophyte and in return gets protection from it. Such  beneicial symbiotic 
relationship among the two members (fungus and plant) is said to be symbiosis; or mycorrhizal  
association. Examples are Psilotum , and Tmesipeteris .
EVOLUTION OF LEAF
Early vascular land plants did not have true leaves or roots. They were small in size, with149. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
dichotomously branched erect smooth aerial parts and equally strong  subterranean anchoring 
and absorptive rhizome .
           
  
Fig. 9.12 Cooksonia : an early vascular plant bearing sporangia  at the tips of the branches.
Cooksonia  (Fig. 9.12) had the same structural layout 
i.e. naked stem without leaves. Such plants started 
to form leaves as small scale like out growths. 
These out growths were not supplied with vascular 
tissues, therefore they were not regarded as true 
leaves. Lycopods  were the irst plants that formed 
the true leaves and roots.
However in lycopods (e.g. Lycopodium ) the leaves 
are small in size. Each leaf has a single undivided 
vein (vascular supply). Such a leaf is called 
microphyll .    
Large leaves having divided veins and veinlets 
with an expanded leaf blade or lamina  are known as megaphylls . Megaphylls are characteristic 
for ferns and seed plants. It is suggested that evolution of megaphyl ls started from a dichotomous 
branching system in some primitive psilopsids approximately 35 0 million years ago. It is assumed 
that evolution of a megaphyll included series of successive evolutionary  steps (Fig. 9.13) which are 
as follows :
Fig. 9.13 Successive evolutionary steps in the evolution of leaf.159. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
Overtopping  
 The dichotomously branched aerial portion of the stem showed unequal branching. Some branches 
remained short while others grew and expanded at a much faster pa ce. All these branches grew in 
diferent planes. Such an unequal development of various branches i s called overtopping .
Planation
Next important step was the arrangement of unequal dichotomies in one p lane. This process is 
termed as planation .
Fusion/Webbing
Overtopping and planation was followed by a process known as fu sion or webbing. The space 
between the overtopped dichotomous branches was occupied by a sheet of par enchyma cells 
which connected these branches forming a lat lamina or leaf bla de type of structure, having many 
dichotomously  branched veins (Fig. 9.13).
During the course of evolution fusion of the vascular strands resulted  in net or reticulate venation  
pattern. The process of evolution of leaf was very slow and gradual which completed in more than 
15-20 million years.
LYCOPSIDA  
The plants of Lycopsida have sporophytes diferentiated into roots, stem a nd true leaves. The 
leaves are small and single- veined, they are also called microph ylls. The arrangement of leaves is 
spiral or opposite. The sporangia develop singly on the upper side of the sporophylls, which may 
or may not be arranged to form strobili (Fig. 9.14)
The sporophyte may have sporangia of one kind as in Lycopodium  or of two kinds i.e., microsporangia 
and megasporangia as in Selaginella  (Fig. 9.15).169. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Lycopsids are also called club mosses/spike mosses because of th eir club/spike  shaped strobili 
and small leaves resembling mosses. On the basis of types of spor es produced in the sporophyte 
they are thus referred to as being homosporous’ or ‘heterosporous’ respecti vely. This condition is 
called homospory and heterospory. Selaginella resembles seed produci ng plants (spermatophytes)  
because of its heterosporic condition and some other characters. The ga metophyte of Lycopsida 
is mainly underground.179. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1    
SPHENOPSIDA
In Sphenopsida (Horsetails), the sporophyte is diferentiated into root, stem and leaves. The leaves 
may be expanded or scale-like and are always arranged in wh orls. Plants belonging to this group are 
also called arthrophytes because the whole plant body is composed of large number of joints. Main 
stem is not smooth, it has large number of ridges and furrows. Each node has whorl of branches. 
The sporangia are born on structures called sporangiophores , aggregated to form strobili.
   
Each sporangiophore has a slender stalk and an expanded disc  at its free end. The sporangia appear 
on the underside of the disc. The thalloid gametophytes grow upon cla yey soil and on mud, e.g., 
Equisetum  (Fig. 9.16).189. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1
Fig. 9.16 Representative of three of the subdivisions of vasc ular plants (a) club moss Lycopodium (b) A horsetail. Equ isetum (c) A tree 
fern.
PTEROPSIDA   
Pteropsida is divided into three classes (i) class Filicineae  (ii) class Gymno  spermae  (iii) class 
Angiospermae . The class Filicineae  contains seedless plants with foliar sporangia (sporangia 
attached to fronds  Fig. 9.17). The leaves are called fronds . When the frond is immature and young, 
it is coiled, this pattern of development is called circinate vernation  (Fig. 9.19). It is an important 
character of this group.
Fig. 9.17 A frond bearing sporangia attached to the underside 
of the leaf.Fig. 9.18 Fems. A ostrich fem growing on a forest loor. See the 
coiled immature and young frondsready to uncoil.199. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Class Filicineae
The Filicineae or fems are mostly shade and moisture loving plants . A very few are able to live 
under dry conditions. They grow on the hills and in plains. Some are epiphytic and grow on the bark 
of trees. Although ferns are worldwide in distribution, they are esp ecially abundant in the tropics. 
They vary greatly in size. Important ferns are Dryopteris , Pteridium , Adiantum  and Pteris  etc.
Adiantum (Maiden-hairfern)
Adiantum  is a fem that grows along moist walls and water courses. It is  a small herb consisting of 
stem, roots and leaves. Stem is a short, thick and underground, us ually unbranched horizontally 
growing rhizome . The rhizome is protected by brownish scales (ramenta) and covered  by persistent 
leaf basis. Fibrous adventitions roots arise from the lower side of th e rhizome. Large, pinnately 
compound fronds arise from the upper side of rhizome. Young leaves (iddle heads) show circinate 
vernation. The stipe (stalk) and rachis are black, smooth, shin y (hence called maiden hair fem). 
The lealets (pinnae, and pinnules - lealets of second order) show dichotomous venation. Sori 
(groups of sporangia) are born on the underside of relexed lobes of the margins of lealets, and 
are protected by bent margin of the lealet, forming false indusium.
Life Cycle : Life cycle of Adiantum  shows hetromorphic alternation of generation, sporophyte 
being dominant and gametophyte small and reduced but separate and  independent. The diploid 
sporophyte produce large number of sori (singular-sorus).They a re green, but when ripe they 
become dark brown. Each sorus consists of a number of sporangi a covered by false indusium. The 
leaves bearing sporangia are called sporophylls.
Each sporangium is slightly lattened, biconvex body (capsule) born on a multicellular stalk. The 
capsular wall consists of a single layer of lat, thin walled  cells. The edge of the capsule is made up 
of two parts, the annulus and the stomium. The annulus occupies three fourth of the edge and 
remaining one fourth is the stomium. Annular cells have their rad ial and inner walls thickened. 
The stomial cells are thin- walled. Inside the sporangia, hapl oid spores are formed by reduction 
division, from diploid spore mother cells. The annulus of the spor angium contracts in dry weather, 
the stomial cells being thin-walled rupture and spores are disper sed by wind.
When a spore falls on a moist soil, it germinates at a suitable tem perature and produces a haploid 
gametophyte or prothallus.209. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 9.19 Life history of Adiantum
The prothallus (gametophyte) is an autotrophic, small, lat, heart shaped structure. At the anterior 
end of the prothallus is a notch in which lies the growing point.  Its size is about 8mm at its longest 
diameter. It is horizontally placed on the soil, and has unicell ular rhizoids on its lower surface 
towards the posterior end. The rhizoids ix the prothallus to the soil a nd absorb nutrients for it. It 
is composed of rounded thin walled cells. The margin of the protha llus is one-celled thick but the 
middle part is many-celled and is cushion-like.
The prothallus is monoecious i.e., male and female sex organs ap pear on the under-surface of the 
same prothallus. In the mature prothallus, archegonia occur near  the notch and the antheridia are 
scattered among the rhizoids.
Each antheridium produces numerous spermatozoids which are spi rally coiled andmulticiliated..219. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
The arcnegonium consists of a venter and a neck. The venter contains the egg or oosphere and is 
embedded in the cushion of the thallus. The antherozoids reach the ar chegonium, by swimming 
in water, Fertilization occurs and an oospore is formed. The oospore forms the sporophyte. Young 
sporophyte is irst attached to the gametophyte but later becomes independent. The life history of 
this fern is shown in Fig 9.19.
EVOLUTION OF SEED HABIT
A review of the kingdom Plantae indicates that the seed-plants (sperma tophytes) predominate 
over non-seed vascular plants.
One of the most signiicant events in the history of land plants’ was  the development of seed 
habit. It was an important change in the reproductive system of the va scular plants which occurred 
approximately 390 million years ago. First complete seeds appeared  approximately 365 million 
years ago during late Devonian times. Technically a seed may be d eined as a fertilized ovule. An 
ovule is an integumented indehiscent megasporangium. Integuments are specialized protective 
coverings around megasporangium which vary in number. All s eed producing plants are called 
spermatophytes. Various steps involved in the evolution of seed habit are a s follows.
1. Evolution of heterospory.
2.  Retention and germination of megaspore within the megasporangium .
3.  Development of protective layers around megasporangium.
4.  Reduction to a single functional megaspore per sporangium.
5.  Development of an embryo sac within the sporangium.
6.  Modiication of distal end of megasporangium for pollen captu re.
 
1.      Evolution of heterospory
Primitive vascular land plants produced one kind of spores, a c ondition called homospory . All groups 
of land plants up to pteridophytes  are homosporous . During the early phase of evolution some 
plant groups started producing two diferent types of spores, the smal ler ones called microspores  
and the larger ones known as megaspores .
The microspores produced inside microsporangia germinate to form m ale gametophyte or the 
microgametophyte , whereas the megaspores germinated to form female gametophyte or229. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1megagametophyte .
2.      Retention and germination of megaspore within the megasporangium
During the usual reproductive cycle in the heterosporous vascular lan d plants, the megaspores 
are used to be shed and dispersed soon after their formation in order to germinate into female 
gametophyte. However in some plants (e.g. Selaginella) the megaspore is  not allowed to escape 
from megasporangium immediately after its formation. In others the m egaspore is permanently 
retained within the megasporangium. Here, within the conines of the m egasporangium wall the 
megaspore germinates to form egg containing female gametophyte.
3.      Development of protective layers around megasp orangium
Some branch like structures of sporophyte surrounding the megaspora ngium fused around to 
megasporangium to form protective envelope or integument. The megasporangiu m tightly locked 
by integuments becomes totally indehiscent. This important change led  to the evolution and 
formation of the ovule, which is nothing but an integumented indehisc ent megasporangium. In 
this way more protection is accorded to the egg-containing apparatus in terrestrial environment.
4.     Reduction to a single functional megaspore per sporangium
Each megaspore mother cell within a megasporangium used to produc e four gametophytes. There 
was a competition for space and food among the four gametophytes. Soon the early vascular 
plants adopted a new strategy i.e., only one megaspore is selected for further development into a 
healthy female gametophyte while the remaining three are aborted.
5.     Development of an embryo sac within the sporang ium
The single healthy megaspore retained within the megasporangium ger minates to form an egg 
containing female gametophyte called an embryo sac.
6.    Modiication of distal end of megasporangium for p ollen capture
When most of the structural and functional changes leading to the d evelopment of seed habit were 
completed, another important modiication took place in the megasporangiu m which was now 
integumented, indehiscent and permanently attached to - the sporophyte. The distal end of the 
megasporangium became modiied for capturing pollen (microspore c ontaining male gametophyte).
Pollen after being trapped in the distal cavity of the megasporang ium produces pollen tube which 
carry male gametes deep into the embryo sac to fertilize the egg, formi ng a zygote, that forms an 
embryo. The megasporangium (ovule) after fertilization is transform ed into a seed, the integuments239. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1becoming the seed coats.. The seed ofers maximum degree of protection to a developing embryo 
under the unfavorable terrestrial environment. The development and evolution of  seed habit was 
a great success and a giant leap which ultimately enabled Pla nts to colonize land permanently.
Class Gymnospermae
Gymnosperms are one of the successful groups of seed plants of world wide distribution They 
constitute about one-third of the world’s forests. The gymnosperms are h eterosporous plants which 
produce seeds but no fruits. The term gymnospermae literally means ‘naked seeded’ (Gymno= 
naked, spermae= seed). The ovules in these plants are usually born e on the exposed surfaces of 
fertile leaves (megasporophylls). These ovules, unlike those of angiosp erms are not enclosed but 
lie naked on the surface of fertile leaves.
Like Filicinae, they show regular heteromorphic alternation of genera tions. They have independent, 
dominant sporophyte but less conspicuous, dependent gametophyte. The fem ale gametophyte is 
permanently retained within the ovule. The two kinds of spores are mic rospores and megaspores 
which develop on microsporophylls and megasporophylls respectively.  The megasporophylls 
bearing ovules are not folded and joined at the margins to form an ovary . For this reason the seeds 
lie naked on the mega sporophylls, (Fig. 9.20a). 
The important genera are Cycas (sago-palm) (Figs. 9.20-a), Pinus  (Pine), Taxus  (Yew), Picea  (Hemlock) 
and Cedrus  (deodar) Ginkgo  (Fig. 9.20-b) etc.249. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Pinus- Life Cycle
The Pine is a conifer. The main plant body is sporophyte which  produces spores after reduction 
division of spore mother cell in sporangia. Conifers are heterosporous . Microspores and megaspores 
are produced in microsporangia and megasporangia respectively. Sporangia (i.e., micro and 
megasporangia) are produced on respective cones (male cones and fema le cones) on the same 
plant.
The male cones are small in size and are produced in clusters on an axis. Each male cone consists 
of microsporophylls which contain microsporangia. Microspore g erminates to form a small 
inconspicuous male gametophyte (also called as microgametophyte) wi thin the spore wall. Such a 
microspore of seed plants that contains the microgametophyte includi ng the gametes is called a 
pollen grain (Plural = pollen).
Pollen are produced in great numbers and are transported by wind . Pollen grain in Pinus has 
two wings attached to its lateral sides. Due to wings, pollen can loa t in air for a longer period of 
time and ean travel long distances. The gymnosperms have successfu lly evolved this totally new 
mechanism of transfer of male gamete to the female gametophyte through w ind which has made 
them independent of water for this purpose. This is an important im provement and evolutionary 
adaptation to survive in the harsh dry terrestrial (land) environment.
The female cones are large and conspicuous. Each female cone is composed of large number of 
spirally arranged scales, the megasporophylls which are woody  in texture. At the base of each 
scale two ovules are present. An ovule is actually a megasporangium  which is protected by an 
integument. Each megasporangium has a single diploid megaspor e mother cell. The megaspore 
mother cell divides meiotically to produce four haploid megaspores. T he functional megaspore (n) 
undergoes mitosis to produce female gametophyte or an embryo sac. The em bryo sac contains 
one to several archegonia. The archegonia contain the female gamete or an  egg.
During pollination the pollen land directly on the ovules. Only few pollen are able to germinate to 
form pollen tubes through which male gametes are transferred to the emb ryo sac for fertilization.
More then one egg can be fertilized to form several zygotes, but one zygote u sually survives to form 
a single embryo. After fertilization the ovule becomes the seed. The seeds now contains an embryo 
along with some stored food material. The seed upon germination gives r ise to a new sporophyte 
plant.
In the life cycle of Piuns, the dominant diploid sporophyte generati on alternates with inconspicuous259. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1haploid gametophyte generation (Fig. 9.21).
Fig.9.21 Life Cycle of Pinus
Class Angiospermae
The term angiosperms literally means “enclosed seeded” (Angio=close Sperm = seed). In these 
plants fertile leaves bearing ovules are folded and joined at the marg ins to form ovaries. The ovary 
after fertilization is changed into a fruit, containing seeds.
Angiosperms make up 235,000 of the 360,000 known species of p lants. They are heterosporous, 
autotrophic plants. These are highly evolved of all the plants on the ea rth. The plants produce 
lowers, fruits and seeds.269. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 9.22 Some of the remarkable diversity of angiosperms is sh own in these photographs. The species shown here are Dicots ( a) 
Fragrant water lily, (b) wild geranium, (c) Indian pipe ( a parasite) an angiosperm that lacks chlorophyll.
Life Cycle of an angiospemic plant
The adult plant is a diploid sporophyte mostly diferentiated into roots , stem and leaves. At maturity 
it produces lowers. A lower is a modiied shoot which consists of a  pedicel, thalamus or torus, and 
loral leaves (sepals, petals, stamens and carpels). Thalamus and loral leaves, especially the stamens 
and the carpels, are so modiied, that they do not even look like stem and  leaves respectively. The 
sepals and petals are non- essential or non-reproductive parts, and  stamens and carpels are the 
essential or reproductive parts of the lower.
The sepals and the petals protect the stamens and the carpels. They a lso attract insects for 
pollination. When the pollination is over, the sepals usually and the petals always fall of.
The anther contain microspore mother cells which produce haploid m icrospores through meiosis. 
Each microspore germinates to produce male gametophyte. Such microsp ores containing male 
gametophytes are called pollen. 
The carpel consists of a basal broader part, the ovary, the style a nd the terminal part of the style, 
the stigma. The ovary contains ovules. The ovule consists of an integum ent (covering) and a tissue, 
the nucellus present inside.
After pollination, the pollen grain is transferred to the stigma. Her e it germinates to form a pollen 
tube. The nucleus of the microspore divides by mitotic divisions to for m two male gametes and 
the tube nucleus. At this stage of development, the pollen grain is cal led male gametophyte. In the 
meantime certain changes occur in the ovule leading to the formation of female spore (megaspore). 
The megaspore develops into female gametophyte. This consists of seven cell s only. One of these279. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1cells is the egg or oosphere.   
 The pollen tube grows through the style, enters the ovule and then reaches  the female gametophyte. 
Here it discharges the male gametes. The egg and one of the two male ga metes fuse to form the 
oospore. The second male gamete fuses with the secondary nucleus to form  endosperm nucleus 
(double fertilization) . The oospore develops into an embryo and endosperm nucleus develops 
into a multicellular nutritive tissue, the endosperm.
Animation 9.2: Angiosperm Reproduction
Source and Credit: amoebasisters289. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Seed Formation
Meanwhile, the integuments of the ovule form testa and tegmen and ovary wa ll develops into the 
fruit. Seeds usually undergo a period of rest and then under sui table conditions, germinate and 
produce a seedling which gradually changes into a sporophyte ( Fig. 9.23).
Thus an alternation of dominant sporophyte generation(2n) occurs wi th inconspicuous 
gametophyte generation(n).
Fig. 9.23 Life Cycle of on angiospermic plants
Double Fertilization 
Double fertilization is a special process found in Angiosperms. In this two male gametes fuses with 
two cells simultaneously. A male gamete (n) fuses with egg (n) to form a diploid zygote (2n) which 
develops later into an embryo and second male gamete (n) fuses with a nother female cell called 
fusion nucleus (2n) resulting into a triploid (3n) endosperm c ell, which develops into food storing299. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1endosperm tissue. It is an important evolutionary advancement in whic h food storage in fertilized 
ovule is made only on fertilization i.e. formation of zygote. This ac tually helps the plant to economize 
its food resources.
Classiication of Angiosperms
The class Angiospermae is divided into two sub-classes, the Monocoty ledonae (with one cotyledon) 
and the Dicotyledonae (with two cotyledons), according to the number of c otyledons in the embryo.
The plants included in the Monocotyledonae are called Monocotyledonous  plants or Monocots. 
The plants included in the Dicotyledonae are called Dicotyledonous  plants or Dicots. A few 
distinguishing characters of the two classes are given below:Animation 9.3: Double Fertilization
Source and Credit: online.science.psu309. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
    Fig. 9.24 Comparison of Dicot and Monocot319. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Angiospermic Familes
Some Angoispermic families are described below :
1. Rosaceae (Rose family). 2. Fabaceae (Pea family). 
3. Mimosaceae ( Acacia family). 4. Solanaceae (Potato family) .
5. Caeselpiniaceae {Cassiafamily). 6. Poaceae (Grass family) .
ROSACEAE (Rose Family) :
A family with about 100 genera and 2000 species is distribu ted over most of the earth. In Pakistan 
29 genera and about 213 species are reported.
Familiar Plants:  Pyrus  (pear); Rosa  (rose); Malus  (apple); Fragaria  (strawberry) etc.
Animation 9.4: Rosaceae
Source and Credit: loradesdehuelva329. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 9.25 Rosaceae : A-twig; B-young stamen; B1-enlarged open anther, showing pollen in it; C-style hairy and stigma bila biate; C1-
enlarged bilabiate stigma.339. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Vegetative Characters
Plants are trees, shrubs and herbs. Stem of the shrubby plants usually have spines. Leaves are 
alternate, rarely opposite, simple or compound, with paired stipul es, which are sometimes adnate 
to the petiole; spines may also occur on the rachis.
Floral Characters
Inlorescence is variable, solitary or may be racemose or cymose clu ster. Flowers are mostly bisexual, 
and actinomorphic, often perigynous to some degree, usually showy a nd scented. Calyx: 5 sepals 
rarely 4, united at the base. Corolla:  Petals 5, or numerous in multiple of 5, which are free rosaceous , 
large and showy. Androecium:  Numerous stamens, sometimes only 5 or 10. Gynoecium  is of 1 
to numerous separate carpels or variously united, ovary generally s uperior sometimes inferior; 
Placentation  basal, when the carpel is one or apocarpous, but axile when th e carpels are many 
and syncarpous (fused).
Economic Importance : Economic importance of this family is great in providing the plea sure and 
welfare to mankind. The members of this family are important in temperate regions for fruit and 
ornamentals. Perhaps they rank third in commercial importance i n the temperate zone among the 
families of lowering plants.
Important fruits are Apple, Pear, Peach, Almond, Apricot, Straw berry, etc.
A large number of plants are ornamental and are grown in gard ens for their beautiful and scented 
lowers. The most widely cultivated genus for decorative purpose is Rosa , Rose which has been 
grown in gardens since ancient times and whose named cultivars are now numbered in thousands. 
Many other genera are also grown for their beautiful lowers in the p arks and gardens.
The branches of Crataegus  provide excellent walking sticks and wood. The wood of Pyrus pastia  is 
used for making tobacco pipes.
In Asian countries the petals of common rose usually called gula bs are used in making gulkand, 
and are also used in extraction of an essential oil (rose oil) used  as perfume, when distilled with 
water the petals give Rose-water or Ark-Gulab, which is used for cu ring eye disease, and for many 
other purposes.
SOLANACEAE: Night Shade or Potato Family
It is family of about 90 genera and 2000 species of tropical a nd temperate distribution. In Pakistan 
14 genera and about 52 species are reported, Nasir (1985).349. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
Familiar Plants:  Solanum tuberosum  (Potato), Nicotiana tabacum  (Tobacco), Lycopersicum esculentum  
(Tomato), Capsicum frutescens  (Red pepper).
Vegetative Characters :  Plants including in this family are herbs, shrubs, someti mes trees or vines. 
Stem is hairy or prickly. Leaves  are alternate or rarely becoming opposite in the loral region, 
simple, petiolate, rarely sessile.
Fig. 9.26 Solanaceae : Solarium nigrum, A - twig, B-Flower C-fruit , D-seed359. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Floral Characters
Inlorescence:  Typically an axillary cyme or combination of cyilies, someti mes helicoids, or 
axillary umbellate cymes. Flowers: Mostly bisexual, usually actinomorphic or weakly zygomorphic,  
hypogynous, usually pentamerous. Calyx:  United 5 sepals, usually persistant. Corolla:  United 5 
petals, corolla rotate to tubular. Androecium: Stamens 5, free but i nserted on the corolla tube 
(epipetalous) rarely stamens 4 and didynamous (arranged in tw o whorls of 2 each). Gynoecium: 
A compound pistil of 2 united carpels; ovary obliquely placed, superior, bilocular, or imperfectly 
4-locular by false septum; Placentation  axile.
Economic Importance :  Members of the family Solanaceae provides drugs and food, some ar e 
weedy, some are poisonous, and others are handsome ornamentals. The m ost important plant 
in the family is  Solanum tuberosum  (Potato-white or Irish Potato). In Ireland people are completely 
dependent on Potatoes.
.
Lycopersicum  esculentum  (tomato), the favorite home garden vegetable, was once believed to be 
poisonous.
Other important food plants are Solatium metangena (egg plant or bri njal). The fruit of Capsicum 
annum  and Capsicum  frutescens  are rich in vitamin C and A, are used as condiment. Physalis  (Ground-
Cherry) produces an edible fruit enclosed in a bladder like per sistent calyx, the husk, giving the 
name husk tomatoe.
Another plant of great commercial value is Nicotiana tabacum  the leaves of which are dried and 
made into tobacco, which is used in making cigarettes. Many mem bers of this family yield powerful 
alkaloids, e.g. Atropa belladona, Datura  which are rich in atropine and daturine respectively are 
used medicinally.
Many plants are cultivated in the gardens for their beautiful lower s, these includes Petunia, 
Nicotiana, Cestrum  and Solanum  etc.
F ABACEAE: (Papilionaceae) Pea Family
A family of about 400 genera and 9000 species, the members of th is family occurs all over the 
world, but particularly in the warm temperate regions. In Pakis tan about 82 genera and about 587 
species have been reported.
Familiar Plants:  Lathyrus odoratus  (Sweet pea), Arachis hypogea  (Peanut), Cicer arietinum  (Chick 
Pea) and Dalbergia sissoo  (Shisham).369. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Vegetative Characters :  Habit: Trees shrubs or herbs. Stem: Herbaceous, or woody or climb er 
by tendrils (wiry, coiled thread like structures). Leaves: Compoun d or rarely simple, sometimes 
partially or completely modiied into tendrils, alternate, stipulate; s tipules mostly leafy.
Fig. 9.27 Fabaceae (Papilionaceae): Sesbania sesbar; A -twig; B-lower; B1 standard verillium; C-fruit a legume; D-carpel379. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Floral Characters :  Inlorescence:  Racemose or solitary axillary. Flowers:  Bisexual, zygomorphic, 
bracteate, pedicellate, perigynous, pentamerous and papilionaceous. Calyx:  5 sepals, more or 
less united in a tube, mostly hairy. Corolla:  Papilionaceous; petals 5, usually clawed, dissimilar; 
the upper posterior petal is large and conspicuous and is called  standard or vexillum, 2-lateral 
ones free called wings and 2 anterior inner most that fuse to form a  boat-shaped structure called 
the keel or carina. Androecium:  Stamens 10, mostly diadelphous (united by their ilaments in 2 
groups), 9 fused to form a sheath round the pistil, while 10th p osterior one is free. Gynoecium:  
A simple pistil, 1- carpeled, with 1-locule; ovary superior; ovary and style long, style bent at is bar, 
placentation  (mono carpellary) marginal. Fruit:  Usually a legume or pod, showing a great variety 
of form in various species.
Economic Importance : The family is of considerable importance as a source of high- protein 
food, oil, and forage as well as ornamentals and other uses. Mai n importance lies in the pulses, 
belonging to this family, which are used as food, some important and common species of pulse 
yielding plants are: Gram, Pea, Kidney bean. These pulses are rich in protein contents.
Medicago sativa  Alfafa is one of the world’s best forage crop for horses. Vicia, Melilotus  and Trifolium  
are also cultivated as main fodder crops. Many trees of this fami ly provide excellent timber for 
building, furniture and fuel. Main timber plants are Butea, Dalbergia  etc.
Seeds of Arachis hypogea peanut are edible and also used for extra ction of peanut oil which after 
hydrogenation is used as a vegetable oil. Indigo dyes are obtained f rom Indigofera tinctoria and 
Butea monosperma, yielding yellow dye from lowers.
Many plants of this family are important for medicines: these in clude Glycyrrhiza glabra for 
cough and cold, and Clitoria tematea is used against snake bite.  The red and white seeds of Abrus 
precatorious are used by jewellers as weights called “ratti”. Some important ornamental plants 
include Lathyrus, Lupinus, Clitoria, Butea etc.
CAESALPINIACEAE: Cassia Family
This family includes about 152 genera and about 2300 species . In Pakistan the family is represented 
by 16 genera and about 60 species.
Familiar Plants: Tamarinaus indica, Cassia istula, Bauhinia veriegata.389. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                         Fig. 9.28 Caesalpiniaceae : Cassia senna; A twig, B-lowe r; C-fruit399. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Vegetative Characters Habit:  Mostly trees or shrubs, some are woody climbers; rarely herbs. S tem: 
Erect, woody, herbaceous, or climbing. Leaves: Compound, pinnate, very rarely simple, stipulate
Floral Characters :  Inlorescence:  Axillary or terminal raceme or panicle or spikes, rarely cym ose; 
showy. Flowers:  Bisexual, zygomorphic, rarely actinomorphic, perigynous. Calyx:  Sepals 5, free or 
connate at base, often colored. Corolla:  Mostly 5 petals, free. Androecium:  Stamens 10 or fewer, 
rarely numerous, free or variously united. Gynoedum:  A simple pistil 1-carpel; ovary superior, 
unilocular; placentation  marginal; stigma simple. Fruit:  Legume
Economic Importance :  The family is of great importance. Some plants are ornamental, som e 
have medicinal importance, a few have food and other values.
The leaves of Cassia alata  are used to cure ring worm and skin diseases. Cassia senna  and C. obovata  
are cultivated for the leaves which yield the drug Senna, which is  the base for a laxative. Oil extracted 
from the seeds of Cynometera caulilora  is applied externally for skin diseases.
Common ornamental plants are Bauhinia variegata  (Kachnar), Cassia istula  (Amaltas), Parkinsonia,  
etc.
       
The leaves and lower’s bud of Bauhinia variegata  are used as vegetable. The acidic fruit of Tamarindus  
indica  are edible and are rich in tartaric acid. The bark of Bauhinia and Tamarindus indica  is used in 
tanning. The heartwood of Haematoxylon  (Longwood) yield the dye Haematoxylin.
MIMOSACEAE: Mimosa or Acacia Family :
A family of about 56 genera and about 2800 species. In Pakis tan it is represented by 11 genera and 
49 species, of these only 4 genera and 18 species are native and r est are introduced.
Familiar Plants :  Acacia nilotica , Albizzia lebbek, Mimosa pudica  Touch me not, Prosopis glandulosa, 
P. cineraria.
Vegetative Characters :  Habit: Mostly trees or shrubs, rarely climbers or herbs. Most of them 
are xerophytes. Stem: Mostly woody. Leaves: Pinnate by compound, altern ate, stipulate, stipules 
modiied into thorns.
Floral Characters :  Inlorescence:  Spike like or head or umbel, rarely racemose or globose umbels. 
Flowers:  Bisexual, Actinomorphic, hypogynous to slightly perigynous, b racteate. Calyx:  Usually409. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1sepals 5, generally fused, toothed or lobed. Corolla:  petals 5, free or fused; corolla lobed. 
Androecium: Stamens 5 to numerous, free, or adnate to the base of corolla. Gynoecium:  A simple 
pistil of 1 carpel, ovary unilocular, superior; ovules many, p lacentation marginal. Fruit:  A legume 
dehiscent or indehiscent.
Economic Importance : Many trees of this family including species of Acacia, Albizzia  and Xylia  
provide commercially important wood, which is used for construction  purpose or for furniture or 
as a fuel. The wood of Albizzia  lebbek is used in cabinet work, and railway carriages.
Arabic gum is obtained from Acacia nilotica  and A. Senegal.  Katha a dye is obtained from Acacia 
catechu.  The tender leaves of Accacia nilotica  are used as blood puriier.
Some common garden plants grown for their beautiful lowers are Mimosa pudica  and Acacia 
melanoxylon . A few species of Prosopis  are planted in the arid zones for breaking the wind pressure.
Animation 9.5: MIMOSACEAE
Source and Credit: kidzsearch419. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1
Fig. 9.29 Mimosaceae : P rosopsiscineraria; A-twig, B-inloresen ce; C-lower; -D-fruits429. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1POACEAE: (Gramineae) Grass Family
Distributed throughout the world wherever vascular plants can survive. It includes about 600 
genera, 10,000 species. In Pakistan it is represented by 158 g enera and 492 species.
The traditional family name Gramineae takes its name from the Latin  Grammar which was used as a 
‘generic’ name for certain grasses, is permitted by the Internationa l Code of Binomial Nomenclature, 
which also provides for the use of Poaceae, based upon the type genus Poa Linn.
Familiar Plants:  Triticum vulgare,  Wheat; Zea mays , Com; Avena sativa , Oats; Oryza sativa , Rice; 
Bambusa, Bamboo; Saccharam oicinarum  Sugar Cane etc.
Vegetative Characters : Habit: Annual or perennial, herbs. Stem: Jointed usually holl ow, at the 
internodes, closed at the nodes. Leaves: Solitary at the nodes, sometimes cr owded at the base of 
the stem, alternate, exstipulate, ligulate, mostly sessile, leaf-base m ostly sheathing, simple.
Inlorescence:  Mostly compound composed of units called spikelets which are variou sly arranged 
(indense clusters as in wheat, compound spike, or loosely on bran ched axis-as in oats , spikelets 
consisting of bracts, arranged along a slender axis (called rachilla) the two lower bracts (called 
glumes) which are empty; the succeeding lemmas enclosing a lower  and opposed by a hyaline 
scale called palea. The Whole (lemma, palea, and lower) termed a s loret; the glumes or lemmas 
often bearing one or more stif bristles (called awns); this basic  pattern of spikelet structure is 
consistent throughout the family. Spikelets of grasses vary widely in diferent genera, particularly 
as to number of fertile lorets in each, and deposition of sexes with th em.
Flowers:  Usually bisexual, sometimes unisexual, small and inconspi cuous, sessile, bracteate, 
incomplete, zygomorphic, hypogynous. Perianth:  Absent or represented by 2, (rarely 3), minute 
hyaline or leshy scales called lodicules. Androecium:  Stamens 1 to 6, usually 3. with delicate 
ilaments. Gynoecium:  A compound pistil of 3 united carpels, anthers versatale, though only one 
is functional free; stigmas usually large feather like. Fruit : Grains or Caryopsis (caryopsis a dry, 
indehicent fruit in which fruit wall (pericarp) is completed,  fused with seed coat).
Economic Importance :  Economically family Poaceae has greater importance than any other  family 
of lowering plants. It has great economic importance to both man and  animals. Cereals and millets 
which constitute the chief food stuf of mankind, belongs to this fam ily. Most of the fodder crops, 
which are equally important to domestic animals, also belong to thi s family.439. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Plants providing food for man includes: Triticum sp . (wheat), Avena sativa  (Oats), Zea mays  (Corn, 
Maize), Oryza sativa  (Rice), Hordeum vulgare  (Barley), Secale cereale  (Rye), Penisetum typhoideum ; 
Sorghum vulgare  etc.
Fig. 9.30 Poaceae (Gramineae): Chloris barbata: A nabit; B -spikelet; C-glumes; D-fertile lamma, E-lower; F-fruit;449. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
The dried stem and leaves of the cereal crops are used as fodder for the cattle. Sugar is obtained 
from the juice of Saccharum oicinarum  (Sugar Cane). Many grasses are used in the lawns e.g. 
Agrostis, Poa , Festuca  etc. and have ornamental signiicance.
Bambusa  (Bamboo) are used as building material for the thatching huts,  making boats, carts, pipes 
etc. and the split stem are woven into mats, baskets, fans, hats, cou rse umbrella. Leaves are also 
given to horses as a cure of cough and cold etc. Certain grasses y ield aromatic oils, e.g. Cymbopogon 
citratus (lemon grass) which yield lemon grass oil is used i n perfumes and soap industry and for 
making infusions. Some species of the grasses are used in maki ng papers.
Ethyl alcohol and many other kind of beverages are also prepared f rom cereals for example whisky 
from Rye, barley, corn and rum molasses from sugar cane. Fi bers obtained from the leaves of 
Saccharum munja  which is used in making ropes.
Animation 9.7: Poaceae
Source and Credit: next.cc459. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q1.       Fill in the blanks.
              (i)     The sporophyte is __________ and__ _______ generation and the gametophyte is_______  
                       and_______ .
              (ii)    The motile asexual reproductive cells ar e characteristics of _____ and are called______ .
        
              (iii)   The sexual reproduction is said to be oogamous or heterogamous if the two fusing 
                      gametes are-------------------.
              (iv)   In the stem of Monocotyledons the bundles are_ _________while in the stem of 
                      Dicotyledons they are___________ .
              (v)    The double fertilization is the characteri stic feature of_____.
              (vi)   Stem roots and leaves are the_____________ __parts and lowers, fruits and seeds are   
                      the :________ parts of the plant.
              (vii)   _______  is the phenomenon of the produc tion of two kinds of spores in the plants.
              (ix)   The naked-seeded plants are included i n the group_______.
Q.2       Short questions.
              (i)     (a)      How are ferns better adapted to life on land than liverworts and mosses?
                      (b)      Which of the following ar e nutritionally self supporting:
                      1.       Mature liverwort and moss g ametophyte.
                      2.       Mature liverwort and moss s porophyte.
              (ii)    (a)     The chances of survival an d development of wind-blown pollen grains are much 
                                less than those of spores of  Adiantum. Comment on this statement.
                      (b)      Account for the fact that meg aspores are large and microspores are small.
                      (c)      What important advances ha ve angiosperms made towards the seed plant life?469. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1       
              (iii)       Write a note on the alternation of gener ations.
              
              (iv)       What is the importance of the followin g?
                          (i)         Seed.                                                 (ii)       Dou ble fertilization.
                          (iii)       Heterospory. 
              (vi)       Pick and match the following:
                          (i)         Fem sporophyte                                involves vegetative parts of plants.
                          (ii)        The moss plant                                  is the irst cell of sporop hyte.
                          (iii)       The gamete                                        is the last cell of gam etophyte.
                          (iv)       The spores                                          are asexual reproducti ve cells.
                          (v)        Vegetative reproduction                  are haploid cells.
                          (vi)        The oospore is                                   gametophyti c generation.
                          (vii)      The gamete                                        is a diploid generation.
                          (viii)     The spore mother cell                      is the irst cell of gametophytes.
                          (ix)       The spore with                                   naked seeds.
                          (x)        Gymnosperms are the plants         divides by reduction division to form 
                                                                                                   hap loid spores.
                          (vii) Sketch and label a fertil e pinnule and a sporangium of Adiantium.
Q.3      Extensive Questions
             (i)          To what does alternation of generation s refer in the plants? Deine sporophyte and     
                           gametophyte. With which stage is  an adult animal comparable? How are they 
                          reproductively dissimilar?
   
             (ii)         What is a seed? Why is the seed a crucial adaptation to terrestrial life?
    
             (iii)        Describe evolution of leaf and its i mportance in vascular plants.
             (iv)        Disciiss evolution of seed and it sig niicance.479. Kingdom Plantae eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                    
            (v)       In what way do the lowering plants di fer from the rest of the seed plants? What is 
                       the stigma? Is fertilization in ang iosperms direct or indirect? From what tissue does 
                       angiosperm fruit develop?
    
            (vi)      What two classes comprise the angiosperm s? How do the two classes structurally 
                       difer from one another? Which class  derived from the other? Explain.