CHAPTER
2 Biological Molecules
Animation 2.1 : Molecular Biology 
Source & Credit: godandscience22. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1INTRODUCTION TO BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry is a branch of Biology, which deals with the stud y of chemical components and 
the chemical processes in living organisms. A basic knowledge of Biochemistry is essential 
for understanding anatomy and physiology, because all of the str uctures of an organism have 
biochemical organization. For example, photosynthesis, respiration,  digestion, muscle contraction 
can all be described in biochemical terms.
All living things are made of certain chemical compounds, whi ch are generally classiied as organic 
and inorganic. Most important organic compounds in living orga nisms are carbohydrates, proteins, 
lipids and nucleic acids. Among inorganic substances are water, carbon dioxide, acids, bases, and 
salts.
Typically an animal and a bacterial cell consists of chemi cals as shown in the following table.
                  Table 2.1 Chemical composition of a Bacterial and a Mammalian cell.
      Chemical components                                   % total cell weight
               Bacterial cell              Mammalian cell
1 Water                        70                         17 
2 Proteins                        15                         18
3 Carbohydrates                         3                          4
4 Lipids                         2                          3
5 DNA                         1                        0.25
6 RNA                         6                         1.1
7 Other organic molecules
(Enzymes, hormones,
metabolites)                        2                           2
8 Inorganic ions
(Na+, K+, Ca++, Mg++
Cl-, SO4-- etc)                        1                          1
The survival of an organism depends upon its ability to take some c hemicals from its environment 
and use them to make chemicals of its living matter. For this reas on, cells of every organism are32. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1constantly taking in new substances and changing them chemic ally in various ways i.e. building 
new cellular materials and obtaining energy for their needs. Li fe of an organism depends upon the 
ceaseless chemical activities in its cells. This chemical acti vity is maintained with a high degree of 
organization. All the chemical reactions taking place within a  cell are collectively called metabolism.
Metabolic processes are characterized as anabolism and cataboli sm. Those reactions in which 
simpler substances are combined to form complex substances are called anabolic reactions. 
Anabolic reactions need energy. Energy is released by the break d own of complex molecules into 
simpler ones, such reactions are called catabolic reactions. Ana bolic and catabolic reactions go hand 
in hand in the living cells. Complex molecules are broken down a nd the resulting smaller molecules 
are reused to form new complex molecules. Interconversions of carbohyd rates, proteins, and lipids 
that occur continuously in living cells are examples of co-ordina ted catabolic and anabolic activities.
 
Animation 2.2: Introduction to BioChemistry
Source and Credit: wikidoc42. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1IMPORTANCE OF CARBON
Carbon is the basic element of organic compounds. 
Due to its unique properties, carbon occupies the 
central position in the skeleton of life.
Carbon is tetravalent. It can react with many other 
known elements forming covalent bonds.
When a carbon atom combines with four 
atoms or radicals, the four bonds are arranged 
symmetrically in a tetrahedron, and result to give a 
stable coniguration. The stability associated with the tetravalency of carbon atoms makes it a 
favourable element for the synthesis of complicated cellular structur es. Carbon atoms can also 
combine mutually forming stable, branched or unbranched cha ins or rings. This ability of carbon 
is responsible for the vast variety of organic compounds. C - C b onds form a skeleton of organic 
molecules as shown in Fig. 2.1     
Fig. 2.1. : Unbranched and branched chains, and ring stru cture form and by C-C bonds.Covalent bonds result when two or more 
atoms complete their electron shells by 
sharing electrons. When an electron pair 
is shared between two atoms, a single 
covalent bond results. An example is the 
bond between two hydrogen atoms to form 
a hydrogen molecule. Covalent bond stores 
large amount of energy.52. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Carbon combines commonly with H, O, N, P and S. Combinations  with these and other elements 
contribute to the large variety of organic compounds. Carbon and h ydrogen bond (C-H bond) is the 
potential source of chemical energy for cellular activities. Carbon -oxygen association in glycosidic 
linkages provides stability to the complex carbohydrate molecules.  Carbon combines with nitrogen 
in amino acid linkages to form peptide bonds and forms proteins which are very important due to 
their diversity in structure and functions.
Large organic molecules (macromolecules) such as cellulose, fa ts, proteins, etc. are generally 
insoluble in water, hence they form structures of cells. They also serve as storage for smaller 
molecules like glucose, which in turn are responsible for provid ing energy to the body.
Small molecules, such as glucose, amino acids, fatty acid s etc. serve either as a source of energy, 
or as subunits to build macromolecules. Some small molecules ar e so unstable that they are 
immediately broken down to release energy e.g. ATP. Such substanc es serve as immediate source 
of energy for cellular metabolism.
 
 
Animation 2.3: Carbon
Source and Credit: Rebloggy62. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1IMPORTANCE OF WATER
Water is the medium of life. It is the most abundant compound in a ll organisms. It varies from 65 
to 89 percent in diferent organisms. Human tissues contain about 2 0 per cent water in bone cells 
and 85 percent in brain cells. Almost all reactions of a ce ll occur in the presence of water. It also 
takes part in many biochemical reactions such as hydrolysis of macromolecules. It is also used as a 
raw material in photosynthesis. 
Solvent properties
Due to its polarity, water is an excellent solvent for polar substances . Ionic substances when dissolved 
in water, dissociate into positive and negative ions. Non-ionic subs tances having charged groups in 
their molecules are dispersed in water. When in solution, ions an d molecules move randomly and 
are in a more favourable state to react with other molecules and ions. It is because of this property 
of water that almost all reactions in cells occur in aqueous medi a. In cells all chemical reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes which work in aqueous environment. Nonpola r organic molecules, such as 
fats, are insoluble in water and help to maintain membranes wh ich make compartments in the cell.
Heat capacity
Water has great ability of absorbing heat with minimum of chan ge in its own temperature. The 
speciic heat capacity of water - the number of calories required to raise the temperature of 1g of 
water from 15 to 16°C is 1.0. This is because much of the energ y is used to break hydrogen bonds. 
Water thus works as temperature stabilizer for organisms in the en vironment and hence protects 
living material against sudden thermal changes.
 
Animation 2.4: Heat Capacity
Source and Credit: dynamicscience72. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Heat of vaporization
Water absorbs much heat as it changes from liquid to gas. Heat of vaporization is expressed as 
calories absorbed per gram vaporized. The speciic heat of vaporiza tion of water is 574 Kcal/kg, 
which plays an important role in the regulation of heat produced  by oxidation. It also provides 
cooling efect to plants when water is transpired, or to animals when  water is perspired. Evaporation 
of only two ml out of one liter of water, lowers the temperature of the remai ning 998 ml by 1°C.
Ionization of water
The water molecules ionize to form H+ and OH- ions: 
                                                             H20          m           H+      +          OH-
This reaction is reversible but an equilibrium is maintained.  At 25°C the concentration of each of 
H+ and OH- ions in pure water is about 10-7 mole/litre. The H+ and OH- ions afect, and take part in 
many of the reactions that occur in cells. 
Protection
Water is efective lubricant that provides protection against damage resu lting from friction. For 
example, tears protect the surface of eye from the rubbing of eyelids, water also forms a luid 
cushion around organs that helps to protect them from trauma.
CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates occur abundantly in living organisms. They ar e found in all organisms and in almost 
all parts of the cell. Cellulose of wood, cotton and paper, starches  present in cereals, root tubers, cane 
sugar and milk sugar are all examples of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates play both structural and 
functional roles. Simple carbohydrates are the main source of ener gy in cells. Some carbohydrates 
are the main constituents of cell walls in plants and micro-orga nisms.
The word carbohydrate literally means hydrated carbons. They a re composed of carbon, hydrogen 
and oxygen and the ratio of hydrogen and oxygen is the same as i n water. Their general formula 
is Cx (H20 )y where(x) is the whole number from three to many thousands whereas y may be the 
same or diferent whole number. Chemically, carbohydrates are dein ed as polyhydroxy aldehydes 
or kentones, or complex substances which on hydrolysis yield poly hydroxy aldehyde or ketone 
subunits. (Hydrolysis involves the break down of large molecules into smaller ones utilizing water 
molecules).82. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The sources of carbohydrates are green plants. These are the pr imary products of photosynthesis. 
Other compounds of plants are produced from carbohydrates by var ious chemical changes.
Carbohydrates in cell combine with proteins and lipids and the resultant compounds are called 
glycoproteins and glycolipids, respectively. Glycoproteins and g lycolipids have structural role in 
the extracellular matrix of animals and bacterial cell wall.  Both these conjugated molecules are 
components of biological membranes.
Classiication of Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are also called ‘saccharides’ (derived from Greek w ord ‘sakcharon’ meaning sugar) and 
are classiied into three groups: (i) Monosaccharides (ii) Olig osaccharides, and (iii) Polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides:  These are simple sugars. They are sweet in taste, are easily solu ble in water, 
and cannot be hydrolysed into simpler sugars. Chemically they  are either polyhydroxy aldehydes or 
ketones. All carbon atoms in a monosaccharide except one, have a hyd roxyl group. The remaining 
carbon atom is either a part of an aldehyde group or a keto group.  The sugar with aldehyde group 
is called aldo-sugar; and with the keto group as keto-sugar. These are indicated in the case of two 
trioses sketched below (Fig. 2.2).
Fig. 2.2: Structure of glyceraldehyde, a 3C Sugar (C3H6O3). The aldehyde form is glyceraldehyde, whereas ketonic form is dihydroxyacetone.92. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1In nature monosaccharides with 3 to 7 carbon atoms are found. T hey are called trioses (3C), tetroses 
(4C), pentoses (5C), hexoses (6C), and heptoses (7C). They h ave general formula (CH2O)n. where n is 
the whole number from three to seven thousands.
Two trioses mentioned above are, intermediates in respiration and photos ynthesis. Tetroses are 
rare in nature and occur in some bacteria. Pentoses and hexoses ar e most common. From the 
biological point of view the most important hexose is glucose. It is an  aldose sugar. Structure of 
ribose and glucose is given below (Fig. 2.3).
                                                                                                
        
              
          
                               
                                                                Fig. 2.3 Stru cture of Ribose and Glucose.
Most of the monosaccharides form a ring structure when in solution . For example ribose will form 
a ive cornered ring known as ribofuranose, whereas glucose will form six cornered ring known as 
glucopyranose ( Fig. 2.4).102. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1          
                  Fig. 2.4 Ribose and glucose form ring shap ed structures.
In free state, glucose is present in all fruits, being abundant in grapes, igs, and dates. Our blood 
normally contains 0.08% glucose. In combined form, it is foun d in many disaccharides and 
polysaccharides. Starch, cellulose and glycogen yield glucose on complete hydrolysis. Glucose is 
naturally produced in green plants which take carbon dioxide from the air and water from the soil 
to synthesize glucose.
                                                                      light energy
                                        6CO2    +    12H20       8      C6H12O6   +    6O2    +   6H2O
                                                                      chlorophyll
As indicated in the equation, energy is consumed in this process  which is provided by sunlight. This 
is why the process is called Photosynthesis. It is noteworthy that f or the synthesis of 10g of glucose 
717.6 Kcal of solar energy is used. This energy is stored in the glucose molecules as chemical energy 
and becomes available in all organisms when it is oxidized in  the body.
Oligosaccharides:  These are comparatively less sweet in taste, and less soluble in water . 
On hydrolysis oligosaccharides yield from two to ten monosacchari des. The ones yielding two 
monosaccharides are known as disaccharides, those yielding th ree are known as trisaccharides 
and so on. The covalent bond between two monosaccharides is called glycosidic bond.112. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Physiologically important disaccharides are maltose, sucrose, a nd lactose (see Fig. 2.5). Most familiar 
disaccharide is sucrose (cane sugar) which on hydrolysis  yields glucose and fructose, both of which 
are reducing sugars. Its molecular formula is C12H22O11. Its structural formula is given in Fig. 2.5. 
  Fig. 2.5 A disaccharide. Note carefully the glycosidic l inkage between the two monosaccharides.
Animation 2.5: Carbohydrates
Source and Credit: answers122. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Polysaccharides: Polysaccharides are the most complex and the most abundant carboh ydrates 
in nature. They are usually branched and tasteless. They are f ormed by several monosaccharide 
units linked by glycosidic bonds (Fig. 216). Polysaccha rides have high molecular weights and are 
only sparingly soluble in water. Some biologically important polysaccharides are starch, glycogen, 
cellulose, dextrins, agar, pectin, and chitin.
Starch: It is found in fruits, grains, seeds, and tubers. It is the main source of carbohydrates 
for animals. On hydrolysis, it yields glucose molecules. Sta rches are of two types, amylose and 
amylopectin. Amylose starches have unbranched chains of  gluc ose and are soluble in hot water. 
Amylopectin starches have branched chains and are insoluble i n hot or cold water. Starches give 
blue colour with iodine.Animation 2.6: Structural Features of Polysaccharides
Source and Credit: biologie.uni-hamburg
Animation 2.7: Starch
Source and Credit: dynamicscience132. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                      
Fig 2.6.: Polysaccharides are polymers of monosaccharides.  
  
Glycogen:  It is also called animal starch. It is the chief form of car bohydrate stored in animal 
body. It is found abundantly in liver and muscles, though fou nd in all animal cells. It is insoluble in 
water, and gives red colour with iodine. It also yields glucose on  hydrolysis.
Cellulose:  It is the most abundant carbohydrate in nature. Cotton is the pure for m of cellulose. 
It is the main constituent of cell walls of plants and is high ly insoluble in water. On hydrolysis it 
also yields glucose molecules. It is not digested in the human di gestive tract. In the herbivores, it 
is digested because of micro-organisms (bacteria, yeasts, protozoa)  in their digestive tract. These 
micro-organisms secrete an enzyme called cellulase for its diges tion. Cellulose gives no colour with 
iodine.142. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1LIPIDS
The lipids are a heterogenous group of compounds related to fatty a cids. They are insoluble in water 
but soluble in organic solvents such as ether, alcohol, chloroform and benzene. Lipids include fats, 
oils, waxes, cholesterol, and related compounds. 
   
Lipids as hydrophobic compounds, are components of cellular mem branes. Lipids are also used to 
store energy. Because of higher proportion of C-H bonds and very low proportion of oxygen, lipids 
store double the amount of energy as compared to the same amount of any carbohydrate. Some 
lipids provide insulation against atmospheric heat and cold and  also act as water proof material. 
Waxes, in the exoskeleton of insects, and cutin, an additional pr otective layer on the cuticle of 
epidermis of some plant organs e.g. leaves, fruits, seeds etc., are some of the main examples.
Lipids have been classiied as acylglycerols, waxes, phospholi pids, sphingolipids, glycolipids and 
terpenoid lipids including carotenoids and steroids. The structu re of some of these lipids is given 
below.
Acylglycerols
Acylglycerols are composed of glycerol and fatty acids (Fig. 2 .7). The most widely spread acyl glycerol 
is triacyl glycerol, also called triglycerides or neutral lipi ds. Chemically, acylglycerols can be deined 
as esters of fatty acids and alcohol. An ester is the compound prod uced as the result of a chemical 
reaction of an alcohol with an acid and a water molecule is relea sed as shown below:
                                           C2H5OH   +   HOOCCH3        8   C2H5OCOCH3   +   H20
                                            alcohol        acetic acid             an ester
As indicated by dotted squares, OH is released from alcohol and  H from an acid.
H and OH combine and form a water molecule. Fatty acids are one of the most important components 
of triglycerides.152. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   Fig. 2.7: Triacylglycerol is composed of one glycerol and thre e fatty acid molecules.
 
Animation 2.8: Triglyceride
Source and Credit: i-biology162. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fatty acids contain even numbers ( 2-30) of carbon atoms in s traight chain attached with hydrogen 
and having an acidic group COOH (carboxylic group). They  may contain no double bond (saturated 
fatty acids) or up to 6 double bonds (unsaturated fatty acids). In animals the fatty acids are straight 
chains (Fig. 2.8.), while in plants these may be branched or ringed. Solubility of fatty acids in organic 
solvents and their melting points increase with increasing number of carbon atoms in chain. Palmitic 
acid (C16) is much more soluble in organic solvent than butyric acid (C4). The melting point of palmitic 
acid is 63.1°C as against -8°C for butyric acid.
Fig. 2.8: Some fatty acids with carbon numbers 2-18 are show n. Oleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid (note a doub le bond between 
C9 and C10). Other fatty acids are saturated.
Fats containing unsaturated fatty acids are usually liquid a t room temperature and are said to be 
oils. Fats containing saturated fatty acids are solids. Anima l fats are solid at room temperature, 
whereas most of the plant fats are liquids. Fats and oils are li ghter than water and have a speciic 
gravity of about 0.8. They are not crystalline but some can be cry stallized under speciic conditions.
Waxes
Waxes are widespread as protective coatings on fruits and leaves. Some insects also secrete wax. 
Chemically, waxes are mixtures of long chain alkanes (with od d number of carbons atoms ranging 
from C25 to C35) and alcohols, ketones and esters of long chain fatty acids. Wa xes protect plants from 
water loss and abrasive damage. They also provide water barrier f or insects, birds and animals 
such as sheep.172. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Phospholipids
Phospholipids are derivatives of phosphatidic acid (Fig.2.9.) , which are composed of glycerol, 
fatty acids and phosphoric acid. Nitrogenous bases such as c holine, ethanolamine and serine 
are important components of phospholipids. They are widespread i n bacteria, animal and plant 
cells and are frequently associated with membranes. Phosphatidy lcholine is one of the common 
phospholipids.
Fig. 2.9.: Phosphatidic acid is composed of glycerol, 2 fatty  acids (on Cl and C2), and a phosphoric acid on C3 of glycerol. In phospholipid 
a nitrogenous base (e.g. choline) is attached to phosphoric a cid in phosphatidic acid.
Terpenoids
Terpenoids are a very large and important group of compounds whi ch are made up of simple 
repeating units, isoprenoid units. This unit by condensation in diferent ways gives rise to compounds 
such as rubber, carotenoids, steroids, terpenes etc. Lipids cons titute major source of energy, and 
play an important role in the structure of membranes of the cell and  of organelles found in the cell. 
They also provide insulation, mechanical protection and protection fr om water loss and abrasive 
damage.
PROTEINS
Proteins are the most abundant organic compounds to be found in cel ls and comprise over 50% of 
their total dry weight. They are present in all types of cells and  in all parts of the cell.182. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Proteins perform many functions. They build many structures of the cell. All enzymes are proteins 
and in this way they control the whole metabolism of the cell. As h ormones, proteins regulate 
metabolic processes. Some proteins (e.g. hemoglobin) work as carrier s and transport speciic 
substances such as oxygen, lipids, metal ions, etc. Some protein s called antibodies, defend the 
body against pathogens. Blood clotting proteins prevent the loss of blood  from the body after an 
injury. Movement of organs and organisms, and movement of chromosomes  during anaphase of 
cell division, are caused by proteins.
Proteins are polymers of amino acids, the compounds containing c arbon, nitrogen, oxygen and 
hydrogen. The number of amino acids varies from a few to 3000 or  even more in diferent proteins.
Amino acids:  About 170 types of amino acids have 
been found to occur in cells and tissues. Of these, 
about 25 are constituents of proteins. Most of the 
proteins are however, made of 20 types
of amino acids.
All the amino acids have an amino group (-NH2) and a 
carboxyl group (-COOH) attached to the same carbon 
atom, also known as alpha carbon. They have the 
general formula as:
Animation 2.9: Amino Acid
Source and Credit: wikipedia192. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1R may be a hydrogen atom as in glycine, or CH3 as in alanine, or any other group. So amino acids
mainly difer due to the type or nature of R group.
Amino acids are linked together to form polypeptides proteins . The amino group of one amino 
acid may react with the carboxyl group of another releasing a mol ecule of water. For example, 
glycine and alanine may combine as shown in Fig.2.10.
The linkage between the hydroxyl group of carboxyl group of one a mino acid and the hydrogen of
amino group of another amino acid release H20 and C - N link, to form a bond called peptide bond .
The resultant compound glycylalanine, has two amino acid subu nits and is a dipeptide. A dipeptide
has an amino group at one end and a carboxyl group at the other e nd of the molecule. So both 
reactive parts are again available for further peptide bonds to produ ce tripeptides, tetrapeptides, 
and pentapeptides etc, leading to polypeptide chains.
 
                                                     Fig. 2.10 Peptide linkage - formation of peptide bond
STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS
Each protein has speciic properties which are determined by the nu mber and the speciic sequence 
of amino acids in a molecule, and upon the shape which th e molecule assumes as the chain folds 
into its inal, compact form. There are four levels of organization w hich are described below.202. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Primary structure:  The primary structure comprises the number and sequence of amin o acids 
in a protein molecule. F. Sanger was the irst scientist who determin ed the sequence of amino acids 
in a protein molecule. After ten years of careful work, he conclud ed, that insulin is composed of 51 
amino acids in two chains. 
One of the chains had 21 amino acids and the other had 30 am ino acids and they were held together 
by disulphide bridges. Haemoglobin is composed of four chain s, two alpha and two beta chains. 
Each alpha chain contains 141 amino acids, while each beta  chain contains 146 amino acids (Fig. 
2.11). The size of a protein molecule is determined by the type of am ino acids and the number of 
amino acids comprising that particular protein molecule. 
Fig. 2.11. Polypeptide chains in keratin (ibrous protein )  and in haemoglobin (globular protein) are held together to form res pective 
functional proteins.
Now we know that there are over 10,000 proteins in the human body whi ch are composed of 
unique and speciic arrangements of 20 types of amino acids. T he sequence is determined by the 
order of nucleotides in the DNA. The arrangement of amino acids i n a protein molecule is highly 
speciic for its proper functioning. If any amino acid is not in its normal place, the protein fails to 
carry on its normal function. The best example is the sickle cel l hemoglobin of human beings. In this 
case only one amino acid in each beta chain out of the 574 amin o acids do not occupy the normal 
place in the proteins (in fact this particular amino acid is replaced by some other amino acid), and 
the hemoglobin fails to carry any or suicient oxygen, hence leadin g to death of the patient.212. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Secondary  structure: The polypeptide chains in a protein molecule usually do not lie la t. They 
usually coil into a helix, or into some other regular coniguration.  One of the common secondary 
structures is the a-helix. It involves a spiral formation of the basic polypeptide c hain. The a-helix 
is a very uniform geometric structure with 3.6 amino acids in ea ch turn of the helix. The helical 
structure is kept by the formation of hydrogen bonds among amino ac id molecules in successive 
turns of the spiral. b-pleated sheet is formed by folding back of the polypeptide.
Tertiary structure:  Usually a polypeptide chain bends and folds upon itself form ing a globular 
shape. This is the proteins’ tertiary conformation. It is maintai ned by three types of bonds, namely 
ionic, hydrogen, and disulide (-S-S-). For example, in aqu eous environment the most stable tertiary 
conformation is that in which hydrophobic amino acids are bur ied inside while the hydrophilic 
amino acids are on the surface of the molecule.
Quaternary structure:  In many highly complex proteins, polypeptide tertiary chains are 
aggregated and held together by hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen a nd ionic bonds. This speciic 
arrangement is the quaternary structure. Haemoglobin, the oxygen ca rrying protein of red blood 
cells, exhibits such a structure.
Fig 2.12 Three levels of protein structures compared with a t elephone wire222. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Classiication of proteins
Because of the complexity of structure and diversity in their function , it is very diicult to classify 
proteins in a single well deined fashion. However, according to thei r structure, proteins are 
classiied as follows:
Fibrous proteins:  They consist of molecules having one or more polypeptide chains in the form 
of ibrils. Secondary structure is most important in them. They ar e insoluble in aqueous media. They 
are non-crystalline and are elastic in nature. They perform stru ctural roles in cells and organisms. 
Examples are silk iber (from silk worm, and spiders’ web) myosin (in muscle cells), ibrin (of blood 
clot), and keratin (of nails and hair).
Globular proteins:  These are spherical or ellipsoidal due to multiple folding of pol ypeptide 
chains. Tertiary structure is most important in them. They are sol uble in aqueous media such as salt 
solution, solution of acids or bases, or aqueous alcohol. They ca n be crystallized. They disorganize 
with changes in the physical and physiological environment. Ex amples are enzymes, antibodies, 
hormones and hemoglobin.
NUCLEIC ACIDS (DNA AND RNA)
Nucleic acids were irst isolated in 1869 by F. Miescher from the nuclei of pus cells. Due to their 
isolation from nuclei and their acidic nature, they were named n ucleic acids. Nucleic acids are of 
two types, deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA and ribonucleic acid or  RNA. DNA occurs in chromosomes, 
in the nuclei of the cells and in much lesser amounts in mitoc hondria and chloroplasts. RNA is 
present in the nucleolus, in the ribosomes, in the cytosol and in smaller amounts in other parts of 
the cell.232. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1
                                   Fig. 2.13. Structu ral formula of ATP (a nucleotide) 
Nucleic acids are complex substances. They are polymers of uni ts called nucleotides. DNA is made 
up of deoxyribonucleotides, while RNA is composed of ribonucleotides.  Each nucleotide is made 
of three subunits, a 5-carbon monosaccharide (a pentose sugar), a nitrogen containing base, and 
a phosphoric acid. Pentose sugar in ribonucleotide is ribos e, while in deoxyribonucleotide it is 
deoxyribose. Nitrogenous bases are of two types, single-ringed pyr imidines, and double-ringed 
Purines. Pyrimidines are cytosine (abbreviated as C), thymin e (abbreviated as T), and uracil 
(abbreviated as U). Purines are adenine (abbreviated as A) and guanine (abbreviated as G). Phosphoric 
acid (H3PO4  ) has the ability to develop ester linkage with OH group of Pentose sug ar. In a typical 
nucleotide the nitrogenous base is attached to position 1 of pentose sugar,  while phosphoric acid 
is attached to carbon at position 5 of pentose sugar (Fig 2.13 ).242. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                     
              
                                               
                                                                            Fig. 2.14 : Components of ATP, a nuc leotide.
The compound formed by combination of a base and a pentose sugar is called nucleoside. A 
nucleoside and a phosphoric acid combine to form a nucleotide. E ach nucleotide of RNA contains 
ribose sugar, whereas sugar in each nucleotide of DNA is deoxyri bose (one oxygen removed from 
OH group at carbon number 2). ATP is also an important nuc leotide used as an energy currency by 
the cell (Fig.2.14.) 
DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid )
DNA is the heredity material. It controls the properties and potential ac tivities of a cell. It is made of four 
kinds of nucleotides namely d-adenosine monophosphate (d-AMP),  d -guanosine monophosphate 
(d-GMP), d-cytidine monophosphate (d-CMP), and d-thymidine mon ophosphate (d-TMP). These 
nucleotides are united with one another through phosphodiester linkages  in a speciic sequence to 
form long chains known as polynucleotide chains (Fig.2.15).  Two nucleotides join together to form 
dinucleotide whereas three join together to form trinucleotide. Nicotinamid e adenine dinucleotide, 
abbreviated as NAD, is an example of dinucleotide. It is an impor tant coenzyme in several oxidation-
reduction reactions in the cell.252. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 2.10:  DNA
Source and Credit: Mysciencebook262. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Nitrogenous
baseNucleosides
(ribose +
nitrogenous
base)Nucleotides (ribose + 
nitrogenous 
base+phosphoric  
acid)Nucleosides
(deoxyribose +
nitrogenous  
base)Nucleotides (deoxyribose 
+ nitrogenous base + 
phosphoric  acid)
Adenine
Uracil
Guanine
Cytosine
ThymineAdenosine
Uridine
Guanosine
CytidineAMP, ADP, ATP
UMP, UDP, UTP
GMP, GDP, GTP
CMP, CDP, CTPd-Adenosine
d-Guanosine
d-Cytidine
d-ThymidinedAMP, dADP, dATP
dGMP, dGDP. dGTP
dCMP, dCDP, dCTP
dTMP, dTDP. dTTP
In 1951 Erwin Chargaf provided data about the ratios of diferent bases present in this molecule. 
This data suggested that adenine and thymine are equal in ratio and so are guanine and cytosine 
as shown below in Table 2.2.
     Table 2.2: Relative amounts of bases in DNA from various  organisms (on percentage basis).
Source of DNA Adenine Guanine Thymine Cytosine
Man 30.9 19.9 29.4 19.8
Sheep 29.3 21.4 28.3 21.0
Wheat 27.3 22.7 27.1 22.8
Yeast 31.3 18.7 32.9 17.1
Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin used the technique of X-ray difraction to determine the 
structure of DNA. At the same time James D. Watson and Francis Cri ck built the scale model of DNA. 
All the data thus obtained strongly suggested that DNA is made of two polynucleotide chains or 
strands. The two strands are coiled round each other in the form of a double helix. Coiling of two 
strands is opposite i.e. they are coiled antiparallel to each other. The two chains are held together 
by weak bonds (hydrogen bonds). Adenine (A) is always oppos ite to thymine (T), and guanine (G) 
and cytosine (C) are opposite to each other. There are two hydrogen bonds  between A and T pair, 
and three hydrogen bonds between G and C pair. The two strands are wound around each other 
so that there are 10 base pairs in each turn of about 34 Angstrom  units (one Angstrom = one 
100-millionth of a centimeter) (Fig.2.15).   List of ribonucleotides and deoxyribonucleotides            
RNA                                                    DNA272. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
Fig. 2.15 Model of DNA. Double helical structure of DNA proposed b y Watson & Crick (b). A hypothetical sequence of nucleotid es (on 
the left side) shows hydrogen bonding between the complemen tary bases. Note a double boud between A and T, and trip le bond 
between C and G (a).
 
The amount of DNA is ixed for a particular species, as it depend s upon the number of chromosomes. 
The amount of DNA in germ cells (sperms and ova) is one half to th at of somatic cells (Table 2.3).282. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Table 2.3 Amount of DNA/nucleus in diferent types of cells of a chicken (bird) and a carp 
(ish).
Type of cell                 Amount of DNA/nucleus(in  picogram)
               Chicken                                                   Crap
Red Blood Cells                    2.3                          3.3
Liver cells                  2.4                          3.3
Kidney cells                  2.4                          3.3
Sperm cells                  1.3                          1.6
RNA (Ribonucleic Acid)
Like DNA, RNA is a polymer of ribonucleotides. The RNA molecules  occur as single strand, which 
may be folded back on itself, to give double helical characteristic s. The nitrogenous bases form the 
usual complementary pairing viz. cytosine (C) with guanine ( G) and uracil (U) with adenine (A). RNA 
is synthesized by DNA in a process known as  transcription.
Types of RNA
Three main types of RNAs — messenger RNA (abbreviated as mRNA) , transfer RNA (abbreviated as 
tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (abbreviated as rRNA) are recognized . All these three types of RNAs are 
synthesized from DNA in the nucleus and then are moved out in the c ytoplasm to perform their 
speciic functions.
Messenger RNA (mRNA) : As the name indicates it takes the genetic message from the nucleus 
to the ribosomes in the cytoplasm to form particular proteins. Messenger  RNA carries the genetic 
information from DNA to ribosomes, where amino acids are arranged according to the information 
in mRNA to form speciic protein molecule. This type of RNA consis ts of a single strand of variable 
length. Its length depends upon the size of the gene as well as th e protein for which it is taking the 
message. For example, for a protein molecule of 1,000 amino acids , mRNA will have the length of 
3,000 nucleotides. mRNA is about 3 to 4% of the total RNA in the cel l.Haemophilus inluenzae is the irst microbe to have the genome completely sequenced and this was 
published on July 28, 1995.All the information for the structure and functioning of a cell is  stored in DNA. For example in the 
chromosome of the bacterium E.coli, each of the paired strand of DN A contains about 5 million 
bases arranged in a particular linear order, the information in those bases is divided into units of 
several hundred bases each. Each unit is a gene, a unit of bi ological inheritance. The E.coli genome 
consists of 4,639,221 base pairs, which code for at least 428 8 proteins.292. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Transfer RNA (tRNA): It comprises about 10 to 20% of the cellular RNA. Transfer RNA molecules 
are small, each with a chain length of 75 to 90 nucleotides. It transfers amino acid molecules to the 
site where peptide chains are being synthesized. There is one specii c tRNA for each amino acid. 
So the cell will have at least 20 kinds of tRNA molecules. Trans fer RNA picks up amino acids and 
transfers them to ribosomes, where they are linked to each other to form pr oteins.
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA):  It is the major portion of RNA in the cell, and may be up to 80%  of the 
total RNA. It is strongly associated with the ribosomal protein where 40 to 50% of it is present. It 
acts as a machinery for the synthesis of proteins. On the surf ace of the ribosome the mRNA and 
tRNA molecules interact to translate the information from genes into a sp eciic protein.
Animation 2.11: RNA
Source and Credit: Shapiro Group302. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 2.12: RNA
Source and Credit: Shapiro Group312. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CONJUGATED MOLECULES
Two diferent molecules, belonging to diferent categories, usually comb ine together to form 
conjugated molecules. Carbohydrates may combine with proteins to for m glycoprotein or with lipids 
to form glycolipids. Most of the cellullar secretions are glycoprotei n in nature. Both glycoproteins 
and glycolipids are integral structural components of plasma m embranes. Lipoprotein formed by 
combination of lipids and proteins are basic structural framew ork of all types of membranes in the 
cells. 
Nucleic acids have special ainity for basic proteins. They ar e combined together to form 
nucleoproteins. The nucleohistones are present in chromosomes. These conj ugated proteins 
are not only of structural, but also are of functional signiican ce. They play an important role in 
regulation of gene expression.
Animation 2.13: Conjugated Molecules
source and Credit: fractalield322. Biological Molecules eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                                           
1 .    Fill in the blanks.
         i.     The sum of all the chemical reactions takin g place within a cell is called
                 _______________________.
         ii.     ______________________ is the basic element of organic compounds.
         iii.    All the amino acids have an amino group a nd a carboxyl group attached to the same
                 _______________________ atom.
         iv.    ________________________ is the most abu ndant carbohydrate in nature.
         V.    Adenine and guanine are double ringed bases and are called _______________________.
2 .    Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘fals e’ and write the correct statement if it is
        false.
         i.      A small proportion of water molecules are in  ionized form
         ii.     The covalent bond among two monosaccharides is  called a peptide bond.
         iii.    Glycogen is also called plant starch.
         iv.    Adenine is always opposite to guanine, cytosin e and thymine are opposite to each other 
                 in DNA molecule.
         V.     DNA molecule is made of two polynucleotide stran ds
3.        Short questions.
           i.          Name the carbohydrates suitable as f ood for man.
           ii.         Why are fats considered as high en ergy compounds?
           iii.        What is the function of mRNA?
           iv.        What is the general formula for ami no acids?
           v.         What is the percentage of water in brain  cells of man?
4.        Extensive questions.
           i.          Describe the importance of water for li fe.
           ii.         Describe what do you know about polysa ccharides.
           iii.        Write a short note on amino acids.                                                                            Exercise