CHAPTER
13 Gaseous 
Exchange
Animation 13.1: Gaseous Exchange
Source & Credit: Wikispaces213. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1NEED OF RESPIRATORY GAS EXCHANGE
At all levels of activities in living organisms an uni nterrupted supply of energy is required. Respiration 
is one of the most important metabolic activities of  all organisms. Respiration occurs at two levels, i. e, 
organismic and cellular level. Organismic respiratio n is also known as breathing or ventilation. The 
cellular respiration is directly involved in the produ ction of energy, necessary for all living activities. 
Cellular respiration is the process by which cell ut ilizes oxygen, produces carbon dioxide, extracts and  
conserves the energy from food molecules in biologica lly useful form, such as, ATP.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
GAS EXCHANGE IN AIR AND IN WATER
Exchange of gases during organismic respiration is carried out only by difusion. Respiratory gases 
are exchanged between body luid and outside medium w hich may be water or air. There is no active 
transport mechanism to move respiratory gases across biological membranes. For that matter, air is 
better respiratory’ medium than water. Oxygen can be o btained more easily from air than from water 
because of many reasons.
Firstly, the oxygen content of air is much higher tha n the oxygen content of equal volume of water. A 
liter of water cannot contain even 10 ml of oxygen wh ereas oxygen content of fresh air is about 200 ml 
per liter. Secondly, oxygen difuses about 8000 times more quickly in air than in water.
Breathing or ventilation is directly involved in the ex change of gases .The ventilation of water is far 
more diicult than the ventilation of air, because wa ter is 8000 times more dense than air .In terms 
of viscosity the water is 50 times more viscous, which  makes it more diicult for exchange of gases as 
compared to air.313. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1GASEOUS EXCHANGE IN PLANTS
Plants like animals also get their energy from respiration. In plants, in contrast to animals, no special 
organ or system is present for gaseous exchange as they exist in higher animals. Every cell of plant 
carries out exchange of gases according to its needs. The transpor t system of plants which includes 
conducting tissues i.e. xylem and phloem is not involved in the tran sport of gases in the plants. 
In most cells of mesophyll which are specialized for photosynthes is, there are present large air 
spaces. These air spaces are directly involved in gaseous exchan ge. Stomata are the main sites of 
exchange of gases in plants. Stomata are largely present in the l eaves and in young stem. In older 
stems, cork tissue is present which is formed of dead cells. Th e cork tissue has special pores called
lenticels which are involved in gaseous exchange. Land plants get their oxygen directly from air which 
enters through stomata. Enormous number of stomata are. present on the l eaves. It is estimated 
that there are 12000 stomata per square centimeter of leaf surface in  Tobacco plant. These stomata 
lead to the intercellular spaces (spaces between cells) of mesophyl l tissue. The air spaces are 
comparable to honey comb. These 
air spaces may comprise up to 40% 
of the total volume of the leaf. The 
exchange of gases between and the 
moist surface of mesophyll cells 
takes place promptly (Fig 13.1). The 
roots of the land plants get their 
oxygen from the air existing in the 
spaces between the soil particles. 
Aquatic plants obtain their oxygen 
by difusion from dissolved oxygen 
in water.
                                                                                           Fig. 13.1 St omata on leaf surface413. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Photorespiration and its Consequences
Respiratory activity which occurs in plants during daytime is  called photorespiration . In the process 
of photorespiration carbon dioxide is released and oxygen is abs orbed. The oxygen absorbed is 
not useful to produce energy such as ATP. In other words photorespi ration is a light dependent 
process during which oxygen is absorbed and carbon dioxide i s released. This oxygen is derived 
from the early reaction of photosynthesis.
The photorespiration is a process in which ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco) 
ixes oxygen instead of carbon dioxide which results in lowering the overall rate of carbon dioxide 
ixation and plant growth. 
Ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate (RuBP) reacts with oxygen in  photorespiration
The irst step of photorespiration during which RuBP reacts with ox ygen is carried out by rubisco, 
the most abundant protein in chloroplasts and probably the most ab undant protein in the world. 
The rubisco is carboxylase as well as oxygenase. When rubis co acts as carboxylase it adds carbon 
dioxide to RuBP, which is an accepter molecule. On the other hand when rubisco is oxygenase 
it adds oxygen to RuBP. Both these reactions compete with each other. When  RuBP reacts with 
oxygen, a two carbon compound glycolate is produced.
                                   RuBP            +           O2          8   Glycolate
The glycolate thus produced difuses into the membrane bounded organel les known as peroxisomes . 
In the peroxisomes the glycolate is converted into glycine, through a ser ies of reactions.
                                                       Glycolate                8   glycine
The glycine is the simplest amino acid which soon after its form ation difuses into the mitochondria  
where two glycine molecules are converted into serine and synthesis a molecule of carbon dioxide 
is formed.
                                        2 glycine          8         serine     +     CO2513. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The pathway in which RuBP is converted into serine is called ph otorespiration. The process of 
photorespiration uses ATP and NADPH produced in the light reactions  just like Calvin-Benson 
cycle.  But, in fact, photorespiration is reverse of Calvin cycle. During photorespiration carbon 
dioxide is released instead of ixation into carbohydrates. In most p lants photorespiration reduces 
the amount of carbon ixed into -carbohydrates by 25%.
In a hot and dry day the level of oxygen inside the leaf rises. T his is because the stomata close to 
prevent the loss of water. The level of carbon dioxide falls because i t is being consumed and the 
level of oxygen rises because closed stomata do not let it go out.
It is interesting that apparently the photorespiration reduces the photosy nthetic process and it is 
not essential for plants and many plants grow normally without th e process of photorespiration. It 
is also observed that if photorespiration is inhibited chemically , the plant can, still grow. Then why 
does photorespiration exist? The common simple answer to this question  is that the active site of 
rubisco is evolved to bind both carbon dioxide and oxygen together. Ori ginally it was not a problem 
as there was little oxygen in the atmosphere and the carbon dioxid e binding activity was the only 
one used. The photorespiration started when the quantity of oxygen becam e more.
RESPIRATORY ORGANS IN REPRESENTATIVE
AQUATIC AND TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS
 Properties of respiratory surfaces in animals
Respiratory surfaces in animals are the sites where gaseous exch ange takes place. The respiratory 
surfaces in most animals exhibit the following features :
1. Large surface and moisture:
The surface area should be extremely large and kept moist as it is  seen in the lungs in the land 
vertebrates and in the gills in the case of ishes.
2. Thin epithelium:
The distance across which difusion has to take place should be little. In most animals the epithelium 
which separates air and blood is only two cell thick. As a res ult the distance for difusion is very 
short.613. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.13. Ventilation:
Ventilation maintains a steep difusion gradient. There is 
a big diference in the concentration of the gases at two 
points which brings about difusion.
4. Capillary network:
The respiratory site should possess extensive network of 
capillaries through which blood should low all the ime at 
an adequate speed. In this way steep difusion gradient is 
maintained which helps in rapid difusion of oxygen.
Respiration in Hydra
Hydra has no specialized organs for respiration. Exchange 
of gases i.e., intake of oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide, 
occurs through the entire general surface in contact with 
water. Exchange of oxygen in and carbon dioxide out also 
occurs in cells lining the digestive cavity. In this way the 
surface lining of the enteron acts., as an eicient respiratory 
surface (Fig. 13.2).
Fig 13.2 Respiration in Hydra 
Animation 13.2: Hydra
Source and Credit: carnivoraforum713. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Respiration in Earthworm
Although earthworm is much complex than hydra, yet it does not ha ve any specialized respiratory 
organs. The exchange of gases occurs mainly through skin. Sk in is richly supplied with blood capillaries 
and is always kept moist by the secretion of epidermal mucous gl and cells and also by coelomic 
luid exuding out through the dorsal pores. Oxygen dissolved on the w et surface passes through 
the cuticle and epidermal cells into the blood. In the blood, oxyg en combines with haemoglobin 
to form oxyhaemoglobin.Oxyhaemoglobin releases up oxygen at the tissue level. In earthworm, 
blood does not come into direct contact with tissue cells so oxygen must d ifuse through the tissue 
luids and coelomic luids. Carbon dioxide is removed from the tiss ues by the blood and carried in 
the plasma to skin, from where it is excreted ((Fig. 13.3) 
Animation 13.4: Respiration in Earthworm
Source and Credit: waterwereldAnimation 13.3: hydra
Source and Credit: gifsoup813. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     
     Fig. 13.3 Respiration in Earthworm
RESPIRATION IN COCKROACH
Cockroach has specialized organs for respiration. The respirator y system of the cockroach is very 
specialized. It consists of branching systems of air tubules c alled tracheae lined by chitin. The main 
tracheal trunk communicates with exterior by 10 pairs of apertures  called spiracles , present on 
the lateral sides of the body. Two pairs are in thorax while the res t eight are in each of the eight913. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1abdominal segments. The main tracheae divide 
and subdivide forming very ine thin-walled 
tubules called tracheoles . These tracheoles end 
into blind ducts partly illed with luid, in which 
the oxygen dissolves. These surround the organs 
and the tissues and directly supply oxygen to the 
living cells. A concentration gradient is set up 
between them and the spiracular openings and 
oxygen difuses into the trachea from the outside 
air. The movement of the air through the tracheal 
trunks transfers gases through inspiration and 
expiration. Air is pumped in and out of the 
tracheae by the expansion and contraction of 
the abdominal muscles (Dorsoventral muscles). 
When abdomen expands, the irst four pairs 
of spiracles open, air rushes in through these 
spiracles into tracheoles. Abdomen contracts, the 
anterior four pairs of spiracles close and posterior 
six pairs of spiracles open. This forces air through 
the tubes and eventually out of the body. In this 
way exhalation and inhalation take place. From 
the spiracles air enters into trachea and then 
tracheole, from where gaseous exchange between 
tissue cells and air in tracheole takes place. Thus 
air is directly supplied through tracheoles to the 
tissue cells. Blood is not involved in transport of 
gases(Fig.l3.4).
Fig. 13.4 Respiration in Cockroach1013. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Animation 13.5: COCKROACH
Source and Credit: presentmam
Animation 13.6: Gas Exchange in Fish
Source and Credit: s-cool.co.uk1113. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Respiration in ish 
Fish respires through the gills which are paired structures pr esent on either side of the body almost 
at the junction of head and trunk. Gills are most efective and highl y modiied for gaseous exchange 
in aquatic animals. They are in four to ive pairs which may  open through gill slits and are visible on
the surface of the pharynx (cartilaginous ish) or are placed i n bronchial cavities which are covered 
by operculum . Gills have great surface area for gaseous exchange. The gill s urface is all the time 
ventilated by constant low of water. Heart pumps the blood directly to the gills from where 
oxygenated blood is carried to all the parts of the body. The deoxygena ted blood from diferent 
parts of the body is received by heart. The heart of the ish is sing le circuit and the blood lows in 
only one direction. The blood enters the posterior side of heart and after passing through diferent 
chambers it is pumped into the gills. Water enters through the m outh and after passing over the 
gills move out of the body through the gill openings (Fig. 13.5)
      
       Fig. 13.5 Water lows unidirectionally over the gills  of a ish.1213. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Respiration in Frog
In frog, the gaseous exchange occurs through the lungs, by ski n, and buccal chamber which are 
richly supplied with blood vessels. The gaseous exchange through  the skin is known as cutaneous 
respiration. 
Gaseous exchange through the lungs is called pulmonary respiration . In frog the air enters 
through the nostrils, when the nostrils are open; the mouth is closed . After entry of air the nostrils 
close, the loor of buccal cavity is raised, air is pushed into th e lungs. This intake of air is known as 
inhalation or inspiration . Expiration occurs exactly in reverse order in sequence of inspi ration.
                  Fig. 13.6 Two stages in inspiration (b uccal respiration)
Animation 13.7: Respiration in Frog   
Source and Credit: clipartbest1313. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Lungs in frog are simple sacs almost like balloon when they are fully expanded. The inner surface 
of lung is increased by thin walled air chambers. The wal ls of these air chambers are richly supplied 
with capillaries. These blood containing areas in the lungs a re the main sites for gaseous exchange. 
The consumed air after gaseous exchange moves out of the lungs through  the nostrils. The removal 
of consumed air out of the lungs, after gaseous exchange has occu rred, is called exhalation or 
expiration  (Fig. 13.6).
Respiration in birds
Respiratory system in birds is the most eicient and elaborate. The b irds are very active animals 
with high metabolic rate, and thus need large amount of oxygen. Th e respiratory system in the birds 
is so arranged that there is one way low of the air through the lung s and the air is renewed after 
inspiration. In the lungs of birds, tiny thin walled ducts c alled parabronchi  are present instead of 
alveoli. These parabronchi are open at both ends and the air; is  constantly ventilated. The walls of the 
parabronchi are chief sites of gaseous 
exchange. The direction of the blood 
low in the lungs is opposite to that of the 
air low through the parabronchi. This 
counter current exchange increases the 
amount of oxygen which enters blood. 
Lungs in birds are very eicient in this 
respect as well, because no stale of air 
remains in the parabronchi. 
The lungs have also developed several 
extensions known as air sacs which reach 
all parts of the body and even penetrate 
some of the bones. In most birds the air 
sacs are nine in number which become 
inlated by air at atmospheric pressure 
when the rib articulations are rotated 
forward and upward. The inlated air 
sacs act as bellows and send air into the 
parabronchi for gaseous exchange.
Fig. 13.7 The Respiratory System of Bird1413. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Respiration in man
In man respiratory system includes lungs and air passages  which are responsible for carrying fresh 
air to the respiratory sites. 
Air Passage Ways
Air passage ways consist of nostrils, nasal cavities, phary nx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles 
and alveolar ducts which ultimately lead into the alveolar sac. N asal cavities are lined with mucous 
membrane of ciliated epithelium. Each nasal cavity is subdivid ed into three passage ways by the 
projection of bones from the walls of the internal nose. Air enters th e nasal cavity through nostril 
and the larger dust particles are trapped by the hair and mu cus in the nostrils. Air, while passing 
through the nasal cavity, becomes moist, warm and iltered of small er foreign particles by mucous Animation 13.8: Respiration in Frog   
Source and Credit: clipartbest1513. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1membrane. The nasal cavity leads into the throat or pharynx by two internal openings. The pharynx 
is a muscular passage lined with mucous membrane. The air  is channelized from the pharynx into 
the larynx.
The larynx  or voice box is a complex cartilaginous structure surrounding the upper end of the 
trachea. One of the cartilages, the epiglottis has a muscularly c ontrolled, hinge-like action and 
serves as a lid which automatically covers the opening of the lar ynx during the act of swallowing so 
as to prevent the entry of food or liquids into the larynx. The openi ng of larynx is called glottis and 
is also lined with mucous membrane. In the glottis the mucous m embrane is stretched across into 
two thin edged ibrous bands called vocal cords,  which help in voice production, when vibrated by 
air.
Fig. 13.8 Events in the throat associated with breathing (a) and swallowing (b). The commonly held belief that th e epiglottis closes 
downward upon the larynx when food is swallowed is not quite true. The closure is probably never complete; the degree of cl osure 
is determined partly by the backward movement of the tongue  during swallowing (which forces the epiglottis into a more or le ss 
horizontal position) and partly by the upward movement of the  larynx (which brings it up under the epiglottis). Food does not enter 
the partly open larynx and obstruct breathing primarily becau se the epiglottis diverts the food mass to one side of the ope ning and 
safely down the esophagus.
The trachea  or wind Pipe  is a tubular structure lying ventral to the oesophagus and extends to the
chest cavity or thorax where it is divided into right and left bron chi. In the wall of trachea there 
are a series of C shaped cartilage rings which prevent the trachea  from collapsing and keep the 
passage of air open. Each bronchus on entering the lung divides  and subdivides progressively into1613. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1smaller and smaller bronchi . When the smaller bronchi attain a diameter of one mm or less, th en 
they are called bronchioles . Bronchi have thesame cartilage rings as the trachea, but the rin gs are 
progressively replaced by irregularly distributed cartilage pl ates and the bronchioles totally lack 
cartilages. Bronchioles are made up of mainly circular smooth muscles.
The bronchioles continue to divide and subdivide deep into the lungs a nd inally open into a large
number of air-sacs. Air-sac is the functional unit of the lun gs. Each air-sac consists of several 
microscopic single layered structures called alveoli . Overlying the alveoli there is a rich network of 
blood capillaries to produce an excellent site for the exchange of g ases.
The lungs are closed sacs that are connected to the outside by way of the trachea and the nostrils 
or mouth. Lungs are spongy because of the presence of millions of alveoli. Lungs are placed in 
the chest cavity. Chest cavity is bounded by ribs and muscles on the sides. The loor of the chest is 
called diaphragm .Diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscles. Lungs are covered with double layered 
thin membranous sacs called pleura (Fig. 13.9).
                                                                         
                                                                          Fig. 13.9 Human respiratory organs1713. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1MECHANICS OF VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY
REGULATION OF BREATHING IN MAN
Breathing is a process in which fresh air containing more oxy gen is pumped into the lungs and air 
with more carbon dioxide is pumped out of the lungs. In other words  breathing is a mechanical 
process consisting of two phases, inspiration and expiration. Dur ing inspiration, fresh air moves in 
and in expiration air with low O2 and high CO2 content moves out of the lungs. During rest breathing Animation 13.9: Respiratory System   
Source and Credit: pleasanton.k121813. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1occurs rhythmically at the frequency of 15 to 20 times per minute in humans. To understand the 
mechanism of breathing we should keep in mind three aspects related  to lungs and associated 
structures.
1.    Lungs are spongy in nature. The lungs themselves neith er pull air in nor can they push it out.   
       During inspiration passive expansion of elastic lungs occurs and expiration is due to a passive 
       contraction of lungs.
2.    The loor of the chest cavity is diaphragm, which is a m uscular sheet. The snape of the 
        diaphragm is more domelike when its muscles are relax ed. On the other hand when the 
        muscles of the diaphragm contract its shape becomes les s domelike.
3.      Walls of the chest cavity are composed of ribs and interc ostal muscles. When muscles between  
        the ribs contract, the ribs are elevated and when muscles  between ribs are relaxed the ribs 
         settle down. 
Inspiration
During inspiration the space inside the chest cavity is increased  in two ways. Firstly, the muscles of 
ribs contract and elevate the ribs upwards and forwards and sec ondly, the muscles of diaphragm
          Fig. 13.10 Movement of Diaphragm1913. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1also contract and diaphragm becomes less domelike. This downwar d movement of diaphragm 
and outward and upward movement of the ribs causes increase in the chest cavity and reduces 
pressure. When the pressure from the lungs is removed they expand. W ith the expansion of the 
lungs vacuum is created inside the lungs in which the air  rushes from the outside due to higher 
atmospheric pressure. This is called inspiration (Fig. 13.1 0,13.11)
Expiration
During expiration the muscles of ribs are relaxed and the ribs  move downward and inward. In 
this way from the sides of chest cavity the space becomes less. At th e same time the muscles 
of diaphragm also relax becoming more domelike 
and the chest cavity is also reduced from the loor. 
This reduction in space of the chest cavity exerts 
pressure on the lungs. When lungs are pressed the 
qir inside lungs moves out of the lungs and this is 
expiration. (Fig. 13.10, 13.11)
                                                                         
                                                                                                            Fig. 13.11In Premature infant, respiratory distress syndrome  is 
common, especially for infant with a gestation age of less 
than 7 months. This occurs because enough surfactant 
(mixture of lipoprotein molecules produced by the secretary 
cells of the alveolar epithelium which forms a layer over the  
surface of the luid within the alveoli to reduce the surface  
tension) is not produced to reduce the tendency of the lungs  
to collapse.2013. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1TRANSPORT OF RESPIRATORY GASES
Intake of oxygen and release of carbon dioxide by blood passing through capillaries of alveoli is 
brought about by the following factors.
1.    Difusion of oxygen in and carbon dioxide out occurs becau se  
        of diference in partial pressures of these gases.
2.   Within the rich network of capillaries surrounding the al veoli, 
       blood is distributed in extremely  thin layers and, theref ore,  
       exposed to large alveolar surface.
3.   Blood in the lungs is separated from the alveolar air by extr emely thin membranes of the  
      capillaries and alveoli.
Transport of Oxygen
In human beings the respiratory pigment is haemoglobin. It is c ontained in the red blood corpuscles. 
Haemoglobin readily combines with oxygen to form bright red oxyhaem oglobin. Oxyhaemoglobin 
is unistable and splits into the normal purple-red coloured haemog lobin and oxygen in the 
conditions of low oxygen concentration and less pressure.Carbonic a nhydrase enzyme present in 
R.B.C. facilitates this activity. In this way haemoglobin acts as an eicient oxygen carrier. A small 
proportion of oxygen also gets dissolved in the blood plasma.
                                     Hb + O2            m  HbO2
Haemoglobin can absorb maximum oxygen at the sea level. The max imum amount of oxygen 
which normal human blood absorbs and carries at the sea-level i s about 20ml/100ml of blood. This 
is the maximum capacity of haemoglobin for oxygen when it is fu lly oxygenated. Under normal 
conditions, blood of alveoli of the lungs is not completely oxygenated. When an oxygen tension is 
115mm mercury, haemoglobin is 98 percent saturated and, therefore,  contains 19.6 ml of oxygen 
per 100ml of blood. This means that haemoglobin can be almost com pletely oxygenated by an 
oxygen pressure of 100 mm mercury, which is present in the lu ngs. Any higher oxygen pressure 
would have the same result. When oxygen pressure falls below 60 mm mercury, as in many cells and 
tissues, the oxygen saturation of haemoglobin decreases very sharpl y. This results in the liberation2113. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1of large quantities of oxygen from haemoglobin. In 
this way in the tissue where oxygen tension is low 
oxyhaemoglobin dissociates rapidly.
There are three important factors which afect the capacity of haemoglob in to combine with oxygen.
1. Carbon dioxide
When carbon dioxide pressure increases, the oxygen tension decrease s, the capacity of haemoglobin 
to hold oxygen becomes less. In this way increased carbon dioxid e tension favours the greater 
liberation of oxygen from the blood to the tissue. 
2. Temperature
Rise in temperature also causes a decrease in the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood, e.g., in the 
increased muscular activity.
3. pH
The pH of blood also inluences the degree to which oxygen binds to ha emoglobin. As the pH of the 
blood declines, the amount of oxygen bound to haemoglobin also declines . This occurs because 
decreased pH results from an increase in hydrogen ions, and the hydrogen ions combine with the 
protein part of the haemoglobin molecules, causing a decrease in th e ability of haemoglobin to 
bind oxygen. Conversely, an increase in blood pH results in an increased ability of haemoglobin to 
bind oxygen.
Transport of Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide is more soluble than oxygen and 
dissolves freely in the tissue luid surrounding the 
cells. From the tissue luid, dissolved carbon dioxide 
passes to the plasma within the blood capillaries.
Carbon dioxide is transported in the blood in several diferent states.
1. Some of the carbon dioxide (about 20%) is carried as carboxy haemoglobin. Carboxyhaemoglobin 
is formed when carbon dioxide combines with amino group of ha emoglobin.
2. Other plasma proteins also carry about 5% carbon dioxide fr om the body luids to the capillaries 
of lungs.As a scuba diver descends in the sea, the pressure of th e 
water on his body prevents normal expansion of the lungs. 
To compensate, the diver breaths pressurized air from air 
cylinders, which has a greater pressure than sea level ai r 
pressure.
Carbon dioxide which is much more important than oxygen 
as a regulator of normal alveoler ventilation (Breathing) but 
under certain circumstances a reduced P02 (partial pressure 
of the oxygen) in the arterial blood does play an important 
stimulatory role especially during conditions of shock.2213. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.13. About 70% carbon dioxide is carried as bicarbonate ion comb ined with sodium in the plasma. As 
carbon dioxide from tissue luid enters the capillaries it combines  to form carbonic acid.
                                                        
                                                          Corbonic anhydrase 
                                CO2        +     h2O          7 H2CO3
The carbonic acid splits quickly and ionizes to produce hyd rogen ions and bicarbonate ions.
                                                  H2CO3  7  H+ + HCO3-
When blood leaves the capillary bed most of the carbon dioxide is  in the form of bicarbonate 
ions. All these reactions are reversible. In the lungs bicarbona te ions combine with hydrogen ions 
to form carbonic acid which splits into water and carbon diox ide. It is this carbon dioxide which 
difuses out from the capillaries of the lungs into the space of alveol ar sac.
                    HCO3-       +      H+             7  H2CO3          7        CO2        +        H2O
4. Small amount of carbon dioxide is also carried by corpus cles combined with potassium.
Carbon Dioxide Concentration
in Arterial And Venous Blood
It has been found that arterial blood contains about 50 ml of carb on dioxide per 100 ml of blood 
whereas venous blood has 54 ml of carbon dioxide per 100 ml of b lood. In this way each 100 ml 
of blood takes up just 4 ml of carbon dioxide as it passes throug h the tissues and gives of 4 ml of 
carbon dioxide per 100 ml of blood as it passes through the lu ngs.
Respiratory Disorders
Cancer
Many problems in the respiratory system can take place if insid e lining is exposed continuously 
to unhealthy air, containing smoke and other pollutants. Lung ca ncer is one of the most serious 
diseases of respiratory system. Cancer or carcinoma is basical ly malignant tumor of potentially 
unlimited growth that expands locally by invasion and systemica lly by metastasis. Cancer can 
occlude respiratory passages as the tumor replaces lung tissue. Smoking especially in young adults 
is the most potential threat of lung cancer. The chances of lung ca ncer are ten times more in those2313. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1persons who smoke or live in smoky and congested areas as compared to those who do not smoke. 
It is now estimated that 90% of lung cancer is caused by smokin g. Recent research indicates that 
more than ten compounds of tar of tobacco smoke are involved in causing  cancer.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is a disorder of respiratory system. In fact, it i s the general name of a group of diseases 
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis . Pulmonary tuberculosis is a disease of lungs in which in side 
of the lung is damaged resulting in cough and fever. It is mor e common in poor people. Malnutrition 
and poor living conditions facilitate Mycobacterium  to grow. The disease is curable with proper 
medical attention. It is a contagious disease.
Asthma
Asthma is a serious respiratory disease associated with severe parox ysm of diicult breathing, 
usually followed by a period of complete relief, with recurrence of attack at more or less frequent 
intervals. It is an allergic reaction to pollen, spores, cold, hu midity, pollution etc which manifests itself 
by spasmodic contraction of small bronchiole tubes. Asthma resul ts in the release of inlammatory 
chemicals such as histamines into the circulatory system that c ause severe contraction of the 
bronchiole.
Emphysema
Emphysema is a break down of alveoli. This respiratory probl em is more common among smokers. 
The substances present in the smoke of the tobacco weaken the wall of a lveoli. The irritant substances 
of smoke generally cause “smoker’s cough” and 
coughing bursts some of the weakened alveoli. In the 
result of constant coughing the absorbing surface of 
the lung is greatly reduced. The person sufering from 
emphysema cannot oxygenate his blood properly and 
least exertion makes him breathless and exhausted.
Emphysema produces increased airway resistance because the br onchioles are obstructed as a 
result of inlammation and because damaged bronchioles collapse d uring expiration, trapping air 
within the alveolar sacs.
Role of Respiratory Pigments
Various types of respiratory pigments are present in diferent anima ls. The pigment combines with 
oxygen reversibly and increase the oxygen carrying capacity of  the blood. Haemoglobin is the mostIn patients with emphysema, alveolar walls degenerate 
and small alveoli combine to form larger alveoli. The result 
is fewer alveoli, but alveoli with an increased volume an d 
decreased surface area. Although the enlarged alveoli 
are still ventilated, there is inadequate surface area for 
complete gas exchange, and the physiological dead air 
space is increased.2413. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1important protein present in many animals including man. Ha emoglobin in man increases the oxygen 
carrying capacity of the blood to about 75 times. You are familia r with its chemical composition.
Myoglobin is haemoglobin-like iron-containipg protein pigment occu rring in muscle ibers. 
Myoglobin is also known as muscle haemoglobin. It serves as an  intermediate compound for the 
transfer of oxygen from haemoglobin to aerobic metabolic processes of the muscle cells. It can 
also store some oxygen. Myoglobin consists of just one polypeptide chai n associated with an iron-
containing ring structure which can bind with one molecule of ox ygen. The ainity of myoglobins 
to combine with oxygen is much higher as compared to haemoglobin.  
Lung capacities
In an adult human being when the lungs are fully inlated the total inside capacity of lungs is about 
5 litres. Normally when we are at rest or asleep the exchange is onl y about half a litre. The volume 
of air taken inside the lungs and expelled during exercise is a bout 3.5 litres. In other words, there 
is a residual volume of 1.5 litres even during exercise which ca nnot be expelled.
Normally, at rest we inhale and exhale 15-20 times per minute. Du ring exercise the breathing rate 
may rise to 30 times per minute. The increased rate and depth of b reathing during exercise allows 
more oxygen to dissolve in blood and supplied be to the active muscl es. The extra carbon dioxide 
which the muscle puts into the blood is removed by deep and fast br eathing. There is a little change 
in the composition of inhaled and exhaled air during rest or exer cise in most of the constituents of 
the air as seen in the Table 13.1Diving relex
Aquatic mammals especially cetaceans can stay in the depth of the ocean for about two hours 
without coming up for air.
Diving mammals have almost twice the volume of blood in relation to their  body weight as 
compared to non divers. Most of the diving mammals have high concen tration of myoglobin in 
their muscles. Myoglobin binds extra oxygen. 
When a mammal dives to its limit the diving relex is activated. The breathing stops, the rate of 
heart beat slows down to one tenth of the normal rate, theconsumption of oxyg en and energy 
is reduced. The blood is redistributed but most of the blood goes to the brain and heart which 
can least withstand anoxia. Skin muscles and digestive organs and other internal organs receive 
very little blood while an animal is submerged because these area s can survive with less oxygen. 
Muscles shift from aerobic to anaerobic respiration.2513. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                           Table 13.1. Changes in the composition of the breath ed air
                       
Inhaled % Exhaled %
Oxygen 21 16
Carbon dioxide 0.04 4
Water vapours variable saturated
Nitrogen 79 792613. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q .1      Fill in the blanks
              (i)      _____________ is the most abunda nt protein in the world.
              (ii)    Haemoglobin is a complex molecule whi ch contains 9512 atoms and __________amino 
                      acids.
              (iii)   The opening of larynx is called _ ____________________.
                (iv)    When the smaller bronchi attain the diameter of____________mm or less they are called   
                      bronchioles
              (v)    There are about ____________ stomata per square centimeter of leaf surface of tobacco  
                      plant     
Q.2.      Write whether the statement is true or fals e. Correct the statement if it is false.
             (i)      ATP is generated during organismic  respiration .
             (ii)     Water is a better respiratory medium th an air.
             (iii)    The earthworm does not possess special ized organs for respiration.
             (iv)    In parabronchi of birds, the blood low s in the opposite direction of air low.
             (v)     Ring shaped cartilages are present in  trachea of man.
Q.3.      Short questions
             (i)          How does breathing difer from res piration?
             (ii)         How much carbon dioxide is pr esent in venous and arterial blood?
             (iii)        How does air always remain in  the lungs of human beings?
             (iv)        What are the products which are pr oduced during photorespiration?2713. Gaseous Exchange eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1             (v)         How much denser is a water medium  than air medium for exchange of respiratory
                          gases?
Q.4      Extensive questions
             (i)          In what ways is air a better respiratory medium than water?
             (ii)         What is photorespiration? Give its c onsequences.
             (iii)        Describe briely the properties of res piratory surfaces in cockroach.
             (iv)        In what ways is respiration in birds the most eicient and elaborate?
             (v)         Discuss the mechanical aspects of breathing in man.
             (vi)        Write a detailed note on respiratory p igments.
             (vii)       List the air passage way in sequ ence from nostrils to alveoli. Describe the structure 
                          of alveolus in detail.