CHAPTER
11BIOENERGETICS
Animation 11: Bioenergetics
Source & Credit: Wikispaces211. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
Bioenergetics is the quantitative study of energy relationships and  energy conversions in biological 
systems. Biological energy transformations obey the laws of thermodyn amics.
All organisms need free energy for keeping themselves alive and f unctioning. All life on this planet 
Earth is powered, directly or indirectly, by solar energy. But n o organism can make direct use of 
sunlight as source of energy for metabolism; all can use chemi cal energy in the food such as sugars 
etc. The chloroplasts of the plants capture light energy coming fr om the sun and convert it into 
chemical energy that gets stored in sugar and then in other organi c molecules.
With the emergence of photosynthesis on earth, molecular oxygen began  to accumulate slowly in the 
atmosphere. The presence of free oxygen made possible the evolution of res piration. Respiration 
releases great deal of energy, and couples some of this energy to the formation of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) molecules. ATP is a kind of chemical lin k between catabolism  and anabolism .
The process of photosynthesis helps understand some of the principles  of energy transformation 
(Bioenergetics) in living systems. Photosynthetic organisms (high er land plants for instance) use 
solar energy to synthesize organic compounds (such as carbohydr ates) that can not be formed 
without the input of energy. Energy stored in these molecules can be u sed later to power cellular 
processes and can serve as the energy source for all forms of lif e. Whereas photosynthesis provides 
the carbohydrate substrate, glycolysis  and respiration are the processes whereby the energy 
stored in carbohydrate is released in a controlled manner. So the ph otosynthesis acts as an energy-
capturing while respiration as an energy releasing process.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
(CONVERSION OF SOLAR ENERGY INTO CHEMICAL ENERGY)
Photosynthesis  can be deined as the process in which energy-poor inorganic oxi dised compounds 
of carbon (i.e. C02) and hydrogen (i.e. mainly water) are reduced to energy-ric h carbohydrate 
(i.e. sugar-glucose) using the light energy that is absorbed a nd converted into chemical energy 
by chlorophyll and some other photosynthetic pigments. The process of  photosynthesis in green 
plants can be summarised as:311. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1  
 
Photosynthetic Reactants and Products 
From above overall reaction of photosynthesis it becomes evident that carbon dioxide, water and 
light are the reactants while glucose and oxygen are the products. Water appears on both sides 
of the equation because water is used as reactant in some reactions  and released as product in 
other. However, because there is no net yield of H20, we can simplify the summary equation of 
photosynthesis for purpose of discussion:
This is almost exactly opposite to the overall equati on of aerobic respiration 
.Photosynthesis uses the products of respiration and  
respiration uses the products of photosynthesis. The re is another important diference between the 
two processes : Photosynthesis occurs only during day time, whereas respiration goes on day and 
night. During darkness leaves (and other actively metab olizing cells) respire and utilize oxygen and 
release carbon dioxide. At dawn and dusk, when ligh t intensity is low, the rate of photosynthesis and 
respiration may, for a short time, equal one another . Thus the oxygen released from photosynthesis is
just the amount required for cellular respiration. Also, the carbon dioxide released by respiration jus t 
equals the quantity required by photosynthesizing cell s. At this moment there is no net gas exchange 
between the leaves and the atmosphere. This is terme d as compensation point . As the light intensity 
increases, so does the rate of photosynthesis and he nce the requirement for more carbon dioxide 
increases which respiration alone cannot supply. Sim ilarly, the oxygen produced during photosynthesis 
is more than the need of the respiring cells, so th e result is the net release of oxygen coupled with t he
uptake of carbon dioxide.
Water and Photosynthesis
Oxygen released during photosynthesis comes from wate r, and is an important source of atmospheric 
oxygen which most organisms need for aerobic respira tion and thus for obtaining energy to live. In 
1930s, Van Niel hypothesized that plants split water  as a source of hydrogen, releasing oxygen as a 
by-product. Niel’s hypothesis was based on his investig ations on photosynthesis in bacteria that make 
carbohydrate from carbon dioxide, but do not release  oxygen.2 2 6 12 6 2 2chlorophyll                 6CO    +   12H O   +  light   C H O   +   6O    +   6H O
(carbon dioxide)         (water)                                           (gluc ose)      (oxygen)   (water) →
6CO + 6H O + light energy      C H O + 6O2 2 6 12 6 2 →
6 12 6 2 2 2(C H O + 6O 6CO + 6H O + energy) →411. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Niel’s hypothesis that source of oxygen released durin g photosynthesis is water and not carbon dioxide, 
was later conirmed by scientists during 1940s when i rst use of an isotopic tracer (O18) in biological 
research was made. Water and carbon dioxide contain ing heavy-oxygen isotope O18 were prepared in 
the laboratory. Experimental green plants in one gro up were supplied with H20 containing O18 and with 
C02 containing only common oxygen O16. Plants in the second group were supplied with H20
containing common oxygen O16 but with C02 containing O18.
It was found that plants of irst group produced O18 but the plants of second group did not.
Water is thus one of the raw materials of photosynth esis, other being carbon dioxide. Hydrogen 
produced by splitting of water reduces NADP to NADPH2  (NADPH + H+). 
NADPH is the “reducing power” which, along with ATP  also formed during ‘light reactions’, is used to 
reduce C02 to form sugar during ‘dark reactions’.
CHLOROPLASTS - THE SITES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN PLANT S
All green parts of a plant have chloroplasts, but th e leaves are the major sites of18 18Group-1 Plants: CO +2H O  CH O + H O +O 222 2 2
18 18 18Group-2 Plants: CO  +  2H O  CH O +  H O  +  O 22 222 →
 →511. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1   
Fig. 11.1 A plant possesses thick layer of mesophyll cell s rich in chloroplasts. Thylakoids in chloroplasts are stack ed into grana. Light 
reactions take place on the grana, and dark reactions in th e stroma.
photosynthesis in most plants. Chloroplasts are present in very larg e number, about half a million 
per square millimeter of leaf surface. Chloroplasts are presen t mainly in the cells of mesophyll 
tissue inside the leaf (Fig. 11.1). Each mesophyll cell has  about 20-100 chloroplasts. Chloroplast has 
a double membrane envelope that encloses dense luid-illed region, the stroma  which contains 
most of the enzymes required to produce carbohydrate molecules. Another system of membranes 
is suspended in the stroma. These membranes form an elaborate interc onnected set of lat, disc like 
sacs called thylakoids . The thylakoid membrane encloses a luid-illed ‘thylakoid interior space’ 
or lumen , which is separated from the stroma by thylakoid membrane. In some places, thylakoid 
sacs are stacked in columns called grana  (sing granum ). Chlorophyll (and other photosynthetic611. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Photosynthetic prokaryotes lack chloroplasts but they do 
have unstacked photosynthetic membranes which work like 
thylakoids. pigments) are found embedded in the thylakoid membranes and imp art green colour to the plant. 
Electron acceptors of photosynthetic ‘Electron Transport Chain’ are al so parts of these membranes. 
Thylakoid membranes are thus involved in ATP synthesis by chemiosmosis .
Chlorophyll (and other pigments) absorb light 
energy, which is converted into chemical energy 
of ATP and NADPH, the products which are used 
to synthesize sugar in the stroma of chloroplast.
PHOTOSYNTHETIC PIGMENTS
Light can work in chloroplasts only if it is absorbed. Pigmen ts are the substances that absorb visible 
light(380-750 nm in wave length). Diferent pigments absorb ligh t of diferent wave lengths (colours), 
and the wave lengths that are absorbed disappear. An instrument called Spectrophotometer  is 
used to measure relative abilities of diferent pigments to absorb diferen t wavelengths of light. 
A graph plotting absorption of light of diferent wave lengths by a pigment is called absorption 
spectrum  of the pigment. 
Thylakoid membranes contain several kinds of pigments, but chlorophylls  are the main 
photosynthetic pigments. Other, accessory photosynthetic pigments prese nt in the chloroplasts 
include yellow and red to orange carotenoids; carotenes are mostly red to orange and xanthophylls  
are yellow to orange. These broaden the absorption and utilization of l ight energy.
Chlorophylls
There are known many diferent kinds of chlorophylls. Chlorophyl l a, b, c and d are found in 
eukaryotic photosynthetic plants and algae, while the other are foun d in photosynthetic bacteria 
and are known as bacteriochlorophylls.
Chlorophylls absorb mainly violet-blue and orange-red wave length s. Green, yellow and indigo 
wave lengths are least absorbed by chlorophylls and are transmitted  or relected, although the 
yellows are often masked by darker green colour. Hence plants a ppear green, unless masked by 
other pigments (Fig. 11.4).711. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1A chlorophyll molecule has two 
main parts : One lat, square, 
light absorbing hydrophilic head 
and the other long, anchoring, 
hydrophobic hydrocarbon tail. 
The head is complex porphyrin 
ring  which is made up of 4 joined 
smaller pyrrole rings composed 
of carbon and nitrogen atoms. An 
atom of magnesium is present in 
the centre of porphyrin ring and is 
coordinated with the nitrogen of 
each pyrrole ring (Fig. 11.2) That is 
why magnesium deiciency causes 
yellowing in plants.
Haem  portion of haemoglobin 
is also a porphyrin ring but 
containing an ironatom instead of 
magnesium atom in the centre.
Long hydrocarbon tail which is 
attached to one of the pyrrole rings 
is phytol  (C20 H39). The chlorophyll
molecule is embedded in the 
hydrophobic core of thylakoid 
membrane by this tail.
Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b 
difer from each other in only one 
of the functional groups bonded 
to the porphyrin; the methyl group 
(-CH3 ) in chlorophyll a is replaced 
by a terminal carbonyl group
(-CHO) in chlorophyll b.
Fig. 11.2 A molecule of chlorophyll811. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The molecular formulae for chlorophyll a and b are:
Chlorophyll a : C55 H72 05 N4 Mg                                  Chlorophyll b : C55 H70 06 N4 Mg
Due to this slight diference in their structure, the two chlorophylls s how slightly diferent absorption 
spectra and hence diferent colours. Some wave lengths not absorbed by chlorophyll a are very 
efectively absorbed by chlorophyll b and vice-versa. Such diferenc es in structure of diferent 
pigments increase the range of wave lengths of the light absorbed. Chlorophyll a is blue-green 
while chlorophyll b is yellow-green. 
Of all the chlorophylls, chlorophyll a is the-most abundant an d the most important photosynthetic 
pigment as it takes part directly in the light-dependent reactions which convert solar energy 
into chemical energy. It is found in all photosynthetic organisms  except photosynthetic bacteria. 
Chlorophyll a itself exists in several forms difering slightly in their red absorbing peaks e.g. at 670, 
680, 690, 700 nm.
Chlorophyll b is found alongwith chlorophyll a in all green  plants (embryophytes) and green algae.
Chlorophylls are insolube in water but souble in organic solvents,  such as carbon tetrachloride,alcohol 
etc.
Carotenoids-accessory pigments
Carotenoids are yellow and red to orange pigments that absorb strong ly the blueviolet range, 
diferent wave lengths than the chlorophyll absorbs. So they broaden th e spectrum of light that 
provides energy for photosynthesis.
These and chlorophyll b are called accessory pigments  because they absorb light and transfer 
the energy to chlorophyll a, which then initiates the light reaction s. It is generally believed that the 
order of transfer of energy is: 
Some carotenoids protect chlorophyll from intense light by absorb ing and dissipating excessive 
light energy, rather than transferring energy to chlorophyll. (Si milar carotenoids may be protecting 
human eye).carotenoids    chlorophyll b    chloroph yll a  →  →911. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1LIGHT -THE DRIVING ENERGY 
Light is a form of energy called electromagnetic energy or radiation s. Light behaves as waves as 
well as sort of particles called  photons . The radiations most important to life are the visible  light  
that ranges from about 380 to 750 nm in wave length.  
It is the sunlight energy that is absorbed by chlorophyll, converted  into chemical energy, and drives 
the photosynthetic process. Not all the. light falling on the leaves is  absorbed. Only about one 
percent of the light falling on the leaf surface is absorbed, the r est is relected or transmitted.
Absorption spectrum  for chlorophylls (Fig. 11.4) indicates that absorption is max imum in blue and 
red parts of the spectrum, two absorption peaks being at around 430  nm and 670 nm respectively. 
Absorption peaks of carotenoids are diferent from those of chlorophylls .
Diferent wavelengths are not only diferently absorbed by photosynthetic pi gments but are also 
diferently efective in photosynthesis. Graph showing relative efectiveness of  diferent wavelengths
(colours) of light in driving photosynthesis is called 
action spectrum  of photosynthesis (Fig. 11.4)
Fi.g 11.3 Engel man illuminated a ilament of Spirogyra with  light that had been passed through a prism. Aerobic bacte ria moved 
toward the portions of the algal ilament emitting the most oxyge n, along the cells in blue and red portion of the spectrum.The irst action spectrum was obtained by German 
biologist, T.W.Engelmann in 1883. He worked on 
Spirogyra.1011. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Action spectrum  can be obtained by illuminating plant with light of diferent w avelengths (or 
colours) and then estimating relative C02 consumption or oxygen release during photosynthesis.
Fig. 11.4     (a)       Absorption spectrum of chlorophyll an d carotenoids.
(b)      Action spectrum for photosynthesis.
As is evident from above igure 11.4, action spectrum of photosynthesis  corresponds to absorption 
spectrum of chlorophyll. The same two peaks and the valley are obtained for absorption of light as 
well as for CO2 consumption. This also shows that chlorophyll is the photosynthetic  pigment.
However, the action spectrum of photosynthesis does not parallel the abs orption specturm of 
chlorophyll exactly. Compared to the peaks in absorption spectrum , the peaks in action spectrum 
are broader, and the valley is narrower and not as deep.
(Photosynthesis in the most absorbed range is more than the absorption  itself. Likewise, 
photosynthesis in 500-600 nm (including green light) is mor e than the absorption of green light by 
the chlorophyll). This diference occurs because the accessory pig ments, the carotenoids, absorb 
light in this zone and pass on some of the absorbed light to chlor ophylls which then convert light 
energy to chemical energy. When equal intensities of light are given,  there is more photosynthesis 
in red than in blue part of spectrum.1111. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1ROLE OF CARBON DIOXIDE :
A PHOTOSYNTHETIC REACTANT
Sugar is formed during light - independent reactions of photosynthesis by the reduction of CO2, 
using ATP and NADH, the products of light - dependent reactions . Obviously photosynthesis does 
not occur in the absence of CO2.
About 10 percent of total photosynthesis is carried out by terrestrial plants, the rest occurs in oceans, 
lakes and ponds. Aquatic photosynthetic organisms use dissolved CO2, bicarbonates and soluble 
carbonates that are present in water as carbon source. Air contain s about 0.03 - 0.04 percent CO2. 
Photosynthesis occurring on land utilizes this atmospheric C02.
Carbondioxide enters the leaves through stomata  and gets dissolved in the water absorbed by 
the cell walls of mesophyll cells. Stomata are found in a large number in a leaf; their number being 
proportional to the amount of gas difusing into the leaf. Stomata cover on ly 1 - 2 percent of the 
leaf surface but they allow proportionalety much more gas to difuse.
The entry of C02 into the leaves depends upon the opening of stomata. The guard cells  guarding 
the stoma, because of their peculiar structure and changes in th eir shape, regulate the opening 
and closing of stomata.
Stomata are adjustable pores that are 
usually open during the day when CO2 is 
required for photosynthesis and partially 
closed at night when photosynthesis 
stops.
REACTIONS OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Photosynthesis is a ‘redox process’ that can be represented by the following simpliied summary 
equation:Daily rhythmic opening and closing of stomata is also due to a n internal 
clock located in the guard cells. Even if a plant is kep t in a dark closet, 
stomata will continue their daily rhythm of opening and clos ing.1211. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1However, it is not a simple, single step process, but is a complex one that is completed by a series 
of simple steps or reactions. These reactions of photosynthesis consi st of two parts:
The light-dependent reactions (light reactions) which use light directly and 
The light-independent reactions (dark reactions)  which do not use light directly.
Light dependent reactions  constitute that phase of photosynthesis during which light energy is 
absorbed by chlorophyll and other photosynthetic pigment molecules an d converted into chemical 
energy. As a result of this energy conversion, reducing  and assimilating power  in the form of 
NADPH (NADPH + H+) and ATP, are formed, both temporarily storing energy to be carri ed alongwith 
H to the light independent reactions.
NADPH provides energized electron (and H+), while ATP provides chemical energy for the synthesis 
of sugar by reducing CO2, using reducing power and chemical energy of NADPH and A TP respectively, 
produced by light reactions. The energy is thus stored in the molec ules of sugar. This phase of 
photosynthesis is also called dark reactions  because these reactions do not use light directly and 
can take place equally well both in light and dark provided N ADPH2 and ATP of light reactions are 
available.1311. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.5 An overview of photosynthesis : Light - Dependent R eactions (Energy - conversion) and Light - Independent React ions (Energy 
- conservation)1411. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Light dependent Reactions
(Energy-conversion phase; formation of ATP and NADPH)
As has been described previously, sunlight energy which is ab sorbed by photosynthetic pigments 
drives the process of photosynthesis. Photosynthetic pigments are organiz ed into clusters, called 
photosystems , for eicient absorption and utilization of solar energy in thylak oid membranes (Fig. 
11.6).
Fig. 11.6: Light harvesting photosystem. Energy of light (photon ) absorbed by photosynthetic pigment molecules is transferred  from 
molecule to molecule, and inally reaches the reaction cen tre where actual energy conversion begins.1511. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Each photosystem  consists of a light-gathering ‘antenna complex’  and a ‘reaction center’ . The 
antenna complex has many molecules of chlorophyll a, chlorophyl l b and carotenoids, most of 
them channeling the energy to reaction center. Reaction center has one or more molecules of 
chlorophyll a along with a primary electron acceptor , and associated electron carriers of ‘electron 
transport system’ . Chlorophyll a molecules of reaction center and associated protein s are closely 
linked to the nearby electron transport system. Electron transport system plays role in generation 
of ATP by chemiosmosis  (which will be discussed in later section). Light energy abs orbed by the 
pigment molecules of antenna complex is transferred ultimately to th e reaction center. There the 
light energy is converted into chemical energy.
There are two photosystems, photosystem I (PS I)  and photosystem II (PS II) . These are named 
so in order of their discovery. Photosystem  I has chlorophyll a molecule which absorbs maximum 
light of 700 nm and is called P700, whereas reaction center of photosystem II has P680, the form 
of chlorophyll a which absorbs best the light of 680 nm. A sp ecialized molecule called, primary 
electron acceptor is also associated nearby each reaction center. This acceptor traps  the high 
energy electrons from the reaction center and then passes them on to the series of electron carriers. 
During this energy is used to generate ATP by chemiosmosis.
In predominant type of electron transport called non-cyclic electron low,  the electrons pass 
through the two photosystems. In less common type of path called cyclic electron low  only 
photosystem I is involved. Formation of ATP during non-cyclic electr on low is called non-cyclic 
phosphorylation  while that during cyclic electron low is called cyclic phosphorylation .
Non-cyclic Phosphorylation
1.  When photosystem II absorbs light, an electron excited to a hi gher energy level in the reaction   
     center chlorophyll P680 is captured by the primary electron acceptor of PS II. The oxidi zed 
     chlorophyll is now a very strong oxidizing agent; its electr on “hole” must be illed.
2.  This hole is illed by the electrons which are extracted, by a n enzyme, from water. This reaction 
     splits a water molecules into two hydrogen ions and an oxyg en atom, which immediately  
      combines with another oxygen atom to form O2. This water splitting step of photosynthesis that  
      releases oxygen is called photolysis . The oxygen produced during photolysis is the main source  
     of replenishment of atmospheric oxygen.
3.  Each photoexcited electron passes from the primary electron ac ceptor of photosystem II to 
     photosystem I via an electron transport chain.  This chain consists of an electron carrier called1611. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1     plastoquinone  (Pq), a complex of two cytochromes and a copper containing protein  called 
     plastocyanin  (Pc).
4.  As electrons move down the chain, their energy goes on decreasing  and is used by thylakoid    
     membrane to produce ATP. This ATP synthesis is called photophosphorylation  because it is    
     driven by light energy. Speciically, ATP synthesis dur ing non-cyclic electron low is called non-
     cyclic photophosphorylation . This ATP generated by the light reactions will provide chemical     
           energy for the synthesis of sugar during the Cal vin cycle, the second major stage of photosynthesis.
5.  The electron reaches the “bottom” of the electron transport chain and ills an electron “hole” in   
     P700, the chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center of photosystem I.  This hole is created
     when light energy is absorbed by molecules of P700 and drives an electron from P700 to the 
     primary acceptor of photosystem I.
6.  The primary electron acceptor of photosystem I passes the photoexc ited electrons to a second 
     electron transport chain, which tmasmits them to ferredoxin (Fd) , an iron containing protein. 
     An enzyme called NADP reductase then transfers the electrons fr om Fd to NADP . This is the  
      redox reaction that stores the high-energy electrons in NADPH . The NADPH molecule will provide 
     reducing power for the synthesis of sugar in the Calvin cycle.
The path of electrons through the two photosystems during non-cyclic photophosphorylation is 
known as Z-scheme  from its shape.1711. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig 11.7: Non-cyclic electron low during photosynthesis ATP, NADPH and oxygen are generated. The arrows trace the current of li ght-
driven electrons from water to NADPH. Each photon of light excites  single electron, but the diagram tracts two electrons at a time, the 
number of electrons required to reduce NADP+. The numbered ste ps are described in the text.1811. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.8: Cyclic electron low in box. Only PS I involved. ATP is generated but no NADPH and oxygen.1911. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Chemiosmosis
In both cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation, the mechanis m for ATP synthesis is   
chemiosmosis , the process that uses membranes to couple redox reactions to ATP pr oduction. 
Electron transport chain pumps protons (H+) across the membrane of thylakoids in case of 
photosynthesis into the thylakoids space. The energy used for this pumping comes from the 
electrons moving through the electron transport chain. This energy is  transformed into potential 
energy stored in the form of H+ gradient across the membrane. Next the hydrogen ions move down 
their gradient through special complexes called ATP synthase  which are built in the thylakoid 
membrane. During this difusion of H+ the energy of electrons is used to make ATP (Fig. 11.9).
Fig. 11.9 Electron Transport chain and chemiosmosis, couplin g of ETC and formation of ATP by chemiosmosis.2011. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Light independent (or Dark) Reactions
Calvin cycle : carbon ixation and reduction phase, s ynthesis of sugar
The dark reactions  take place in the stroma of chloroplast. These reactions do not requi re light 
directly and can occur in the presence or absence of light provi ded the assimilatory power in the 
form of ATP and NADPH, produced during light reactions is a vailable. Energy of these compounds 
is used in the formation of carbohydrates from C02, and thus stored their in. These reactions can 
be summarised as follows (Fig. 11.10 ):
The details of path of carbon in these reactions were discovered by Melvin Calvin and his colleagues 
at the University of California. Calvin was awarded Nobel Prize in 1961.
The cyclic series of reactions, catalyzed by respective enzymes, by  which the carbon is ixed and 
reduced resulting in the synthesis of sugar during the dark r eactions of photosynthesis is called 
Calvin Cycle .
The Calvin cycle  can be divided into three phases: Carbon ixation, Reduction, and Regeneration 
of CO2 acceptor (RuBP) (Fig 11.10).
Phase 1: Carbon ixation:  Carbon ixation refers to the initial incorporation of CO2 into organic 
material. Keep in mind that we are following three molecules of CO2 through the reaction (because 
3 molecules of CO2 are required to produce one molecule of carbohydrate, a triose). The Calvin 
cycle begins when a molecule of CO2 reacts with a highly reactive phosphorylated ive - carbon 
sugar named ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP).  This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme ribulose 
bisphosphate carboxylase , also known as Rubisco (it is the most abundant protein in chl oroplasts, 
and probably the most abundant protein on Earth). The product of th is reaction is an highly unstable, 
six - carbon intermediate that immediately breaks into two molecules of  three - carbon compound 
called 3 - phosphoglycerate (phosphoglycerie acid-PGA).  The carbon that was originally part 
of CO2 molecule is now a part of an organic molecule; the carbon has b een “ixed”. Because the 
product of initial carbon ixation is a three - carbon compound, the Calvin cycle is also known as C3 
pathway .2 23 2 3CO  + 6NADPH + 9ATP (CH O)  + 6NADP + 9ADP  + 9Pi +3H O
                                                 (carbohydrate) →2111. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Phase 2: Reduction:  Each molecule of (PGA) receives an additional phosphate from ATP  of light 
reaction, forming 1,3 - bisphosphoglycerate  as the product. 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate is reduced to 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate(G3P)  by receiving a pair of electrons donated from NADPH of light 
reactions. G3P is the same three-carbon sugar which is formed in  glycolysis (irst phase of cellular 
respiration) by the splitting of glucose. In this way ixed carb on is reduced to energy rich G3P with 
the energy and reducing power of ATP and NADPH (both the products of light-dependent reactions), 
having the energy stored in it. Actually G3P, and not glucose, is the carbohydrate produced directly 
from the Calvin cycle. For every three molecules of CO2 entering the cycle and combining with 3 
molecules of ive-carbon RuBP, six molecules of G3P (containing 18  carbon in all) are produced. But 
only one molecule of G3P can be counted as a net gain of carbohydr ate. Out of every six molecules 
of G3P formed, only one molecule leaves the cycle to be used by the plan t for making glucose, 
sucrose starch or other carbohydrates, and other organic compounds;  the other ive molecules are 
recycled to regenerate the three molecules of ive-carbon RuBP, the CO2 acceptor.
Phase 3: Regeneration of CO2 acceptor, RuBP:  Through a complex series of reactions, the carbon 
skeletons of ive molecules of three-carbon G3P are rearranged into three mol ecules of ive-carbon 
ribulose phosphate (RuP) . Each RuP is phosphorylated to ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP), the very 
ive-carbon C02 acceptor with which the cycle started. Again three more molecules of  ATP of light 
reactions are used for this phosphorylation of three RuP molecules. These RuBP are now prepared 
to receive C02 again, and the cycle continues.2211. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.10: The Calvin cycle occurs in stroma of chloroplast. Carbon is ixed and reduced to sugar.2311. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                              RESPIRATION
Living organisms need energy to carry on their vital activities. Th is energy is provided from within 
the cells by the phenomenon of respiration. Respiration is the univers al process by which organisms 
breakdown complex compounds containing carbon in a way that al lows the cells to harvest a 
maximum of usable energy. 
In biology the term respiration is used in two ways. More famili arly the term respiration means 
the exchange of respiratory gases (CO2 and O2) between the organism and its environment. This 
exchange is called external respiration . The cellular respiration is the process by which energy is 
made available to cells in a step by step breakdown of C-chain molecules in the cells.
Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration
The most common fuel used by the cell to provide energy by cellular respiration is glucose,. The way 
glucose is metabolized depends on the availability of oxygen. Prior to entering a mitochondrion, 
the glucose molecule is split to form two molecules of pyruvic acid . This reaction is called glycolysis  
(glycolysis literally means splitting of sugar), and occur s in the cytosol and is represented by the 
equation:
This reaction occurs in all the cells and biologists believe that an identical reaction may have occurred 
in the irst cell that was organized on earth. 
The next step in cellular respiration varies depending on the type of the cell and the prevailing 
conditions (Fig. 11.11).2411. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.11 Pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis, follows di ferent catabolic pathways depending on the organism and th e metabolic 
condition.
Cell processes pyruvic acid in three major ways, alcoholic ferm entation, lactic acid fermentation 
and aerobic respiration. The irst two reactions occur in the absenc e of oxygen and are referred 
to as anaerobic (without oxygen). The complete breakdown of glucose molecule occurs only in the 
presence of oxygen, i.e. in aerobic respiration. During aerobic res piration glucose is oxidized to CO2 
and water and energy is released.2511. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Anaerobic Respiration
(i)  Alcoholic Fermentation:  In primitive cells and in some eukaryotic cells such as yeast,  
      pyruvic acid is further broken down by alcoholic ferm entation into alcohol (C2 H5 OH) and CO2.
(ii)  Lactic acid fermentation: In lactic acid fermentation, each pyruvic acid molecule is 
        converted into lactic acid C3 H6 O3 in the absence of oxygen gas:
This form of anaerobic respiration occurs in muscle cells of h umans and other animals during 
extreme physical activities, such as sprinting, when oxygen ca nnot be transported to the cells as 
rapidly as it is needed.
Both alcoholic and lactic acid fermentations yield relatively sm all amounts of energy from glucose 
molecule. Only about 2% of the energy present within the chemical b onds of glucose is converted 
into adenosine triphosphate (ATP). 
Aerobic respiration (Discussed in detail under cellular respiration).
Role of mitochondria in respiration  Mitochondria are large granular or ilamentous organelles 
that are distributed throughout the cytoplasm of animal and plant cells. Each mitochondrion is 
constructed of an outer enclosing membrane and an inner membrane w ith elaborate folds or 
cristae  that extend into the interior of the organelle.
Mitochondria play a part in cellular respiration by transfer ring the energy of the organic molecules 
to the chemical bonds of ATP. A large “battery” of enzymes and c oenzymes slowly release energy2611. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1from the glucose molecules. Thus mitochondria are the “Power houses”  that produce energy 
necessary for many cellular functions.
Adenosine triphosphate and its importance  Adenosine triphosphate, generally abbreviated 
‘ATP’ is a compound found in every living cell and is one of th e essential chemicals of life. It plays 
the key role in most biological energy transformations.
Conventionally, ‘P’ stands for the entire phosphate group. The secon d and the third phosphate 
represent the so called “high energy” bonds. If these are broken b y hydrolysis, far more free energy 
is released as compared to the other bond in the ATP molecule. The breaking of the terminal 
phosphate of ATP releases about 7.3 K cal. of energy. The high energy ‘P’ bond enables the cell to 
accumulate a great quantity of energy in a very small space an d keeps it ready for use as soon as 
it is needed.
The ATP molecule is used by cells as a source of energy for var ious functions for example, synthesis 
of more complex compounds, active transport across the cell membrane,  muscular contraction, 
and nerve conduction, etc.
Biological oxidation  The maintenance of living system requires a continual supply of  free energy 
which is ultimately derived from various oxidation reduction reacti ons. Except for photosynthetic 
and some bacterial chemosynthetic processes, which are themselves oxi dation reduction reactions, 
all other cells depend ultimately for their supply of free energy on  oxidation reactions in respiratory 
processes. In some cases biological oxidation involves the removal of hydrogen, a reaction catalyzed 
by the dehydrogenases  linked to speciic coenzymes. Cellular respiration is essentially  an oxidation 
process.
Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration may be sub-divided into 4 stages:
i.      Glycolysis                                                               ii.           Pyruvic ac id oxidation
iii.    Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle                            iv.          Respiratory chain
Out of these stages the irst occurs in the cytosol for which oxygen is  not essential, while the other 
three occur within the mitochondria where the presence of oxygen is essen tial.2711. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1i.    Glycolysis  Glycolysis is the breakdown of glucose upto the formation of pyruvi c acid. Glycolysis  
      can take place both in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic c ondition) or in the presence of oxygen 
     (aerobic condition). In both, the end product of glucose break down is pyruvic acid.  The      
     breakdown of glucose takes place in a series of steps, each catalyzed by a speciic enzyme. All  
       these enzymes are found dissolved in the cytosol. In add ition to the enzymes, ATP and coenzyme 
     NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) are also essential.
Glycolysis can be divided into two phases, a preparatory phase a nd an oxidative phase (Fig. 11.12). 
In the preparatory phase breakdown of glucose occurs and energy  is expended. In the oxidative 
phase high energy phosphate bonds are formed and energy is stored .
Preparatory phase  The irst step in glycolysis is the transfer of a phosphate grou p from ATP 
to glucose. As a result a molecule of glucose-6 -phosphate is f ormed. An enzyme catalyzes the 
conversion of glucose-6-phosphate  to its isomer, fructose-6 - phosphate . At this stage another 
ATP molecule transfers a second phosphate group. The product is f ructose 1,6-bisphosphate. The 
next step in glycolysis is the enzymatic splitting of fructose 1 ,6 -bisphosphate into two fragments. 
Each of these molecules contains three carbon atoms. One is called 3 - phospo- glyceraldehyde, 
3-PGAL or Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) while the other is dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  
These two molecules are isomers and in fact, are readily intercon verted by yet another enzyme of 
glycolysis.
Oxidative (payof) phase  The next step in glycolysis is crucial to this process. Tw o electrons or 
two hydrogen atoms are removed from the molecule of 3- phosphoglyceraldeh yde (PGAL) and 
transferred to a molecule of NAD. This is of course, an oxidation- reduction reaction, with the PGAL 
being oxidized and the NAD being reduced. During this reaction, a second phosphate group is 
donated to the molecule from inorganic phosphate present in the cell. The resulting molecule is 
called 1,3 Bisphosphoglycerate(BPG) .
The oxidation of PGAL is an energy yielding process. Thus a “h igh energy” phosphate bond is 
created in this molecule. At the very next step in glycolysis this p hosphate group is transferred to a 
molecule of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) converting it into ATP. The en d product of this reaction 
is 3-phospho glycerate (3-PG) . In the next step 3-PG is converted to 2-Phosphoglycerate (2PG).  
From 2PG a molecule of water is removed and the product is phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) . PEP 
then gives up its ‘high energy’ phosphate to convert a second molecu le of ADP to ATP. The product 
is pyruvate, pyruvic acid (C3 H4 O3). It is equivalent to half glucose molecule that has been oxidized 
to the extent of losing two electrons (as hydrogen atoms).2811. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1ii. Pyruvic add oxidation:  Pyruvic acid (pyruvate), the end product of glycolysis, does not 
enter the Krebs cycle directly. The pyruvate (3- carbon molecule) is  irst changed into 2-carbon 
acetic acid molecule. One carbon is released as CO2 (decarboxylation). Acetic acid on entering the 
mitochondrion unites with coenzyme-A (Co A) to form acetyl Co A (acti ve acetate). In addition, more 
hydrogen atoms are transferred to NAD (Fig. 11.13).
iii. Krebs cyde or citric add cycle:  Acetyl CoA now enters a cyclic series of chemical reactions 
during which oxidation process is completed. This series of reac tions is called the Krebs cycle (after 
the name of the biochemist who discovered it), or the citric acid cycl e. The irst step in the cycle 
is the union of acetyl CoA with oxaloacetate to form citrate. In this process, a molecule of CoA is 
regenerated and one molecule of water is used. Oxaloacetate is a 4-c arbon acid. Citrate thus has 6 
carbon atoms.
After two steps that simply result in forming an isomer of citrate,  isocitrate another NAD- mediated 
oxidation takes place. This is accompanied by the removal of a molecule of CO2. The result 
is a-ketoglutarate . It, in turn, undergoes further oxidation (NAD + 2H —> NADH) f ollowed by 
decarboxylation (CO2) and addition of a molecule of water. The product then has one car bon atom 
and one oxygen atom less. It is succinate . The conversion of a-ketoglutarate into succinate is 
accompanied by a free energy change which is utilised in the synthesis of an ATP molecule. The next 
step in the Krebs cycle is the oxidation of succinate to fumarate . Once again, two hydrogen atoms 
are removed, but this time the oxidizing agent is a coenzyme called lavin adenine dinucleotide 
(FAD),  which is reduced to FADH2.2911. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1               Fig. 11.12 Two phases of glycolysis. All of these reactions take place in the cytosol.3011. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.13 Outline of the Krebs cycle. The brackets give the number of carbon atom in each intermediate of the cycle.
With the addition of another molecule of water, fumarate is converted to malate . Another NAD 
mediated oxidation of malate produces oxaloacetate,  the original 4-carbon molecule. This 
completes the cycle. The oxaloacetate may now combine with another molecu le of acetyl CoA to 
enter the cycle and the whole process is repeated (Fig. 11.13).3111. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1iv. Respiratory chain:  In the Krebs cycle NADH and H+ are produced from NAD+. NADH then 
transfers the hydrogen atom to the respiratory chain (also called electron transport system ) 
where electrons are transported in a series of oxidation-reduction steps  to react, ultimately, with 
molecular oxygen. (Fig. 11.14).
The oxidation reduction substances which take part in respiratory  chain are:
i.   A coenzyme called coenzyme Q
ii.  A series of cytochrome enzymes (b,c,a,a3)
iii. Molecular oxygen (02)
Cytochromes  are electron transport intermediates containing haem  of related prosthetic groups, 
that undergo valency changes of iron atom. Haem is the same iron containing group that is oxygen 
carrying pigment in haemoglobin. The path of electrons in the res piratory chain appears to be as 
follows. 
Fig. 11.14 The repiratory electron transport chain and its cou pling with oxidative phosphorylation.3211. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1NADH is oxidized by coenzyme Q.  This oxidation yields enough free energy to permit the synthesis 
of a molecule of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. Coenzyme Q  is in turn oxidized by 
cytochrome b which is then oxidized by cytochrome c. This step al so yields enough energy to permit 
the synthesis of a molecule of ATP. Cytochrome c then reduces a com plex of two enzymes called 
cytochrome a and as (for convenience the complex is referred as c ytochrome a). Cytochrome a is 
oxidized by an atom of oxygen and the electrons arrive at the bottom e nd of the respiratory chain.
Oxygen is the most electronegative substance and the inal acceptor of the electrons. A molecule 
of water is produced. In addition, this inal oxidation provides en ough energy for the synthesis of 
a third molecule of ATP.
Oxidative phosphorylation: Synthesis of ATP in the presence of oxygen is called oxidative 
phosphorylation. Normally, oxidative phosphorylation is coupled wi th the respiratory chain. As 
already described ATP is formed in three steps of die respirator y chain (Fig. 11.14). The equation 
for this process can be expressed as follows:
Where Pi is inorganic phosphate. 
The molecular mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation takes place i n conjunction with the 
respiratory chain in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Here also, as in photosynthesis, the
mechanism involved is chemiosmosis by which electron transport cha in is coupled with synthesis 
of ATP. In this case, however the pumping/movement of protons (H+) is across the inner membrane 
of mitochondrion folded into cristae, between matrix of mitochondrion an d mitochondrion’s 
intermembrane space. The coupling factors in respiration are als o diferent from those in 
photosynthesis.+
2 NADH + H + 3ADP + 3Pi + 1/2 O  NAD + H O + 3 ATP  →+
23311. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 11.15 Stages in aerobic 
respiration. Stage 1: Formation 
of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate. 
Stage 2: The Krebs cycle. Stage 3: 
Respiratory chain and oxidative 
phosphorylation. Each pair of H 
atoms entering the respiratory 
chain as NADH yields 3 ATPs.3411. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1EXERCISE
Q1.       Write whether the statement is ‘true’ or ‘ false’ and write the correct statement if it is 
            false. 
            (i)        Hydroponics are the plants grown i n water culture.
            
            (ii)       Calcium is an essential element for chlorophyll formation.
       
            (iii)      Chlorosis means yellowing of leaves d ue to deiciency of certain essential element of  
                       plant nutrition.
Q.2.     Short questions.
            (i)        List four features of a leaf which show that it is able to carry out photosynthesis 
                       efectively.
            (ii)       Summarise the role of water in photosyn thesis.
            (iii)      What are T.W. Engelman and Melvin  Calvin famous for?
            (iv)      What is the diference between an action sp ectrum and an absorption spectrum?
            (V)       What is the role of accessory pigments  in light absorption?
            (vi)      When and why is there not net exchang e of C02 and O2 between the leaves and the 
                       atmosphere?
            (vii)      What is the net production of ATP duri ng glycolysis?
            (viii)    What is the main diference between photophos phorylation and oxidative 
                       phosphorylation?
            (ix)      What is the location of ETC and chem iosmosis in photosynthesis and cellular 
                       respiration?
            (X)       How did the evolution of photosynthesis afec t the metabolic pathway?3511. Bioenergetics eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1              (xi)    How does absorption spectrum of chloroph yll a difer from that of chlorophyll b?
              (xii)    Why are the carotenoids usually not ob vious in the leaves? They can be seen in the 
                        leaves before leaf fall. Why?
              (xiii)  How is the formation of vitamin A link ed with eating of carrot?
Q.3.      Extensive questions
              (i)       Explain the roles of the following i n aerobic respiration: (a) NAD+ and FAD (b) oxygen.
             (ii)      Sum up how much energy (as ATP)  is made available to the cell from a single glucose 
                        molecule by the operation of glycolys is, the formation of acetyl CoA, the citric acid 
                        cycle, and the electron transport ch ain.
             (iii)     Trace the fate of hydrogen atoms removed  from glucose during glycolysis when 
                        oxygen is present in muscle cells ; compare this to the fate of hydrogen atoms 
                        removed from glucose when the amount of the available oxygen is insuicient to 
                        support aerobic respiration.
             (iv)     Sketch Kreb’s cycle and discuss i ts energy yielding steps.
             (v)      Describe various steps involved in oxida tive break down of glucose to pyruvate.
             (vi)      Sketch respiratory electron transport cha in. Discuss the signiicance of ETC.
             (vii)     Compare photosynthesis with respiration  in plants.
             (viii)   Explain the diference between the cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
                        with the help of Z scheme.
             (ix)     Give an account of light-independent rea ctions of photosynthesis.