16. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1CHAPTER
6 Kingdom
Prokaryotae
)Monera(
Animation 6.1: Enzyme
Source & Credit: Wikispaces26. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Kingdom Prokaryotae consists of organisms with prokaryotic cells.  In Greek the word Pro means  
“before” and karyon  means nucleus. Microbiologists place bacteria in two major categ ories: 
eubacteria (Greek for “true bacteria”) and a much smaller divis ion, the archaeobacteria (Greek for 
“ancient bacteria”).
DISCOVERY OF BACTERIA
It had long been suspected that small creatures exist which are too small to be seen with naked 
eye. But their discovery was linked to the invention of microscope. A Dutc h Scientist “AntonieVan 
Leeuwenhoek” (1673) was the irst to report the microbes such as bacter ia and protozoa. He used a 
simple microscope to describe bacteria and protozoa with accurate dr awings and descriptions and 
called these small creatures as “animalcules” . He irstly observed small creatures in rain water, 
then conirmed these in saliva, vinegar, infusions and other substa nces.
The progress in understanding the nature and importance of these tiny organisms has been slow. The 
existance of microbes was further conirmed by Louis Pasteur’s wor k. Pasteur went on making many 
discoveries in the ield’of microbiology and medicine. His main a chievements are the development 
of vaccines for disease anthrax, fowl cholera  and rabies.  He also made signiicant contributions 
in development of pasteurization process and development of fermentation ind ustries. He proved 
that microorganisms could cause disease.
Rohert Koch formulated the ‘germ theory of disease’ . He isolated typical rodshaped bacteria with 
squarish ends (baccilli) from (he blood of sheep that had di ed of anthrax. Then he discovered 
bacteria that caused tuberculosis  and cholera. He formulated four postulates,  which are the 
main pillars of the germ theory of disease. These are used to ind ou t whether the organism found 
in disease lesions is the causal agent of the disease or not.
1. A speciic organism can always be found in association w ith a given disease.
2. The organism can be isolated and grown in pure culture in the laboratory.
3. The pure culture will produce the disease when inoculated into susceptible animal.
4. It is possible to recover the organism in pure culture from exper imentally infected animal.
Koch and his colleagues invented many techniques concerning inoc ulation, isolation, media 
preparation, maintenance of pure cultures and preparation of speci mens for microscopic 
examinations.36. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1OCCURRENCE OF BACTERIA
Bacteria are wide spread in their occurrence. They are found almost everywhere, in air, land, water, 
oil deposits, food, decaying organic matter, plants, man and an imals. Their kind and number vary 
according to locality and environmental conditions. Some bacteria are always present and contribute 
towards the natural lora. Others are present in speciic environments such as hot springs, alkaline/
acidic soil, highly saline environments, in highly polluted soils and waters.
Animation 6.2: Bacteria Animated
Source and Credit: pinterest46. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1STRUCTURE OF BACTERIA
All bacterial cells invariably have a cell membrane, cytoplasm , ribosome, and chromatin bodies. 
The majority have a cell wall, which gives shape to the bacterial cell. Speciic structures like capsule, 
slime, lagella, pili, imbriae and granules are not found in  all bacteria (refer to Fig. 4.17).
Size
Bacteria range in size from about 0.1 to 600 nm over a single dimension. Bacteria vary in size 
as much as in shape. The smallest (e.g., some members of 
the genus Mycoplasma ) are about 100 to 200 nm in diameter, 
approximately the size of the largest viruses (poxviruses) 
Escherichia coli,  a bacillus of about average size, is 1.1 to 1.5 
nm wide by 2.0 to 6.0 nm long. Some spirochetes occasionally 
reach 500 nm in length whereas Staphylococci and Streptococci 
are 0.75 - 1.25n in diameter.
Shape of Bacteria
On the basis of general shape, bacteria are classiied into three c ategories. These shapes are known 
as cocci, bacilli and spiral .Although most of the bacterial  species have fairly constant characteristic 
cell shape, yet some cells are pleomorphic and they can exist in a  variety of shapes.Recently a huge bacterium has been 
discovered in the intestine of the brown 
surgeonish, Acanthurus nigrofuscus. 
Epulopiscium ishelsoni grows as large as 
600 nm by 80 nm, a little smaller than a 
printed hyphen. It is now clear that a few 
bacteria are much larger than the average 
eukaryotic cell.
Exceptions to the above shapes are 
trichome forming, sheathed, stalked, 
square, starshaped, spindle-shaped, 
lobed and ilamentous bacteria.56. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The cocci  are spherical or oval bacteria having one of several distinct ar rangements based on their 
planes of division. If division is in one plane it will produc e either a diplococcus  or streptococcus  
arrangement. When cocci occur in pairs then 
arrangement is diplococcus, whereas when 
cocci form long chain of cells then arrangement 
is called as streptococci. When the division of 
cell is in two planes it will produce a tetrad  
arrangement. A tetrad is a square of 4 cocci. 
Thirdly, when the division is in three planes, it 
will produce a sarcina  arrangement. Sarcina is a 
cube of 8 cocci. When division occurs in random 
planes, it will produce a staphylococcus  
arrangement in which cocci are arranged in 
irregular, often grape-like clusters. Diplococcus 
pneumoniae  and Staphylococcus  aureus are some 
examples of cocci.
   Fig. 6.2 Cocci
Animation 6.3: Bacteria shape 
Source and Credit: gif2ly66. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1 
Bacilli  are rod-shaped bacteria. Bacilli all 
divide in one plane producing a bacillus, 
streptobacillus,  or diplobacillus . Bacillus 
is a single cell of bacteria. Streptobacillus is 
a chain of bacilli. When rod shaped bacteria 
occur in pairs then arrangement of cells 
is known as diplobacilli. Examples of rod 
shaped bacteria are Escherichia coli, Bacillus 
subtilis , Pseudomonas.
The spiral  shaped bacteria are spirally 
coiled. Spirals come in one of three forms, a 
vibrio , a spirillum,  or a spirochete . Vibrio 
is curved or comma-shaped rod. Spirillum 
is a thick, rigid spiral. Spirochete is a thin, 
lexible spiral. Examples of spiral shaped 
bacteria are Vibrio, Hyphomicrobium.
Animation 6.4: Bacillus Bacteria
Source and Credit: gif2ly76. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Bacterial Cell Structure
Flagella and their frictions :  These are extremely thin, hair like appendages. They come out 
through cell wall and originate from basal body, structure jus t beneath the cell membrane in the 
cytoplasm. They are made up oif protein lagellin . On the basis of presence of lagella, pattern 
of attachment of lagella and the number of lagella present bacteria are classiied into diferent 
taxonomic groups. Atrichous means bacteria are without any lagella. When single polar lagel lum 
is present then condition is known as monotrichous.  If tuft of lagella is present only at one pole of 
bacteria then these are lophotrichous lagella. Amphitrichous  is a condition when tuft of lagella at 
each of two poles is present. In peritrichous  form, lagella surround the whole cell. Most of bacilli 
and spiral shaped bacteria have lagella. Cocci very rarely ha ve lagella. 
Primary function of lagella is to help in motility.With the help of lagella, lagellate bacteria can also 
detect and move in response to chemical signals which is a type of behaviour called as Chemotaxis.Animation 6.5: Spirillum 
Source and Credit: gifsoup86. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                 
                                     
                                    
                                                 Fi g. 6.5 Rod shaped bacterium with lagella (lophotricous)
Pili and their Functions
These are hollow, nonhelical, ilamentous appendages. Pili are smaller than lagella and are not 
involved in motility. True pili are only present on gram-negative bac teria. They are made up of 
special protein called pilin . They are primarily involved in a mating process between cells c alled 
conjugation  process. Some pili function as a means  of attachment of bacteria to various surfaces.
Animation 6.6: Flagelo
Source and Credit: gifsoup96. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The cell envelope: The outer wrapping of bacteria
Bacterial surface and walls are very diverse. Collectively complexes  of layer external to the cell 
protoplasm are called as cell envelope and include capsule, sli me and cell wall. 
Capsule : Bacteria produce capsule, which is made up of repeating polysa ccharide units, and of 
protein, or of both, capsule is tightly bound to the cell. It has a thicker, gummy nature that gives 
sticky characters to colonies of encapsulated bacteria. It provides pathogenicity.
Slime :  Some bacteria are covered with loose, soluble shield of macromolecules  which is called 
as slime capsule and slime provides greater pathogenicity to bac teria and protects them against 
phagocytosis.
Cell Wall:  Beneath the extracellular substances and external to cytoplasmi c membrane cell wall 
is present. It is a rigid structure. It determines the shape of bac terium. Cell wall also protect the 
cells from osmotic lysis. Cell wall is only absent in mycopla smas. Christain Gram developed the 
technique of gram stain. Bacteria could be divided into two groups  based on their response to gram
staining procedure. By this Staining technique Gram-positive bacteria  are stained purple (retain 
the primary dye due to formation of CV- I complex) and Gram-negative bacteria  are stained pink 
(retain secondary dye) in colour. There are many structural dif erences between two groups (Table 
6.1) which are the primary basis for diference in staining behaviour.
                     Table 6.1: Comparison of Gram-pos itive and Gram-negative cell walls.
Characteristics Gram-Positive Gram-negative
Number of major layers 1 2
Chemical make up Peptidoglycan (50% of dry
weight in some bacterial cells)
Teichoic acid
Lipoteichoic acidLipopolysaccharides
Lipoproteins
Peptidoglycan
10% dry weight of some
bacterial cells
Overall thickness Lipids (1-4%)
20-80 nmLipids (11-12%)
8-11 nm
Outer membrane No Yes
Periplasmic space Present in some Present in all
Permeability More permeable Less permeable106. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1The cell walls of most bacteria have a unique macromolecule called  as peptidoglycan . Its amount 
varies in diferent types of bacteria. It is composed of framework of long glycan chains cross-linked 
with peptide fragments. The intact cell wall also contains chem ical constituents such as sugar 
molecules, teichoic acid, lipoproteins and lipopolysaccharides, which are linked to peptidoglycan.
Several bacterial groups lack the cell wall structure characteris tic of Gram positive or Gram negative 
bacteria, and some bacteria have no cell wall at all. Cell wall s of archacnbactcria are diferent 
from eubacteria. They do not contain peptidoglycan. Their cell wa lls are composed of proteins, 
glycoproteins and polysaccharides). 
Cell Membr ane
Just beneath the cell wall is the cell membrane or plasma membran e. It is very thin, lexible and 
completely surrounds the cytoplasm. Plasma membrane is very delic ate in nature any damage to 
it results in death o f the organism. Bacterial membranes difer f rom eukaryotic membranes in 
lacking sterols such as cholesterol.
Cell membrane regulates the transport of proteins, nutrients, sugar a nd electrons or other 
metabolites. The plasma membranes of bacteria also contain enzymes for respiratory metabolism.
 Cytoplasmic matrix
The cytoplasm of prokaryotic cell lacks membrane bound organelles  and cytoskeleton (microtubules). 
The cytoplasmic matrix is the substance present between the plasma membrane and the nucleoid. 
It has gel like consistency. Small molecules can move through it rapidly. The plasma membrane 
and every thing present within it is known as protoplast. Thus th e cytoplasmic matrix is a major 
part of protoplast. Other large discrete structures such as chromati n /nuclear body, ribosomes, 
mesosomes and granules and nucleoid are present in this matrix .Animation 6.7: Bacteria, gram positive 
bacilli
Source and Credit: gif2ly116. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Nucleoid
A bacterial cell unlike the cells of eukaryotic organisms lacks  discrete chromosomes and nuclear 
membrane. The nuclear material or DNA in bacterial cells occupi es a position near to the center 
of cell. This material is a single, circular and double 
stranded DNA molecule. It aggregates as an 
irregular shaped dense area called the nucleoid . 
This chromatin  body  is actually an extremely long 
molecule of DNA that is tightly folded so as to it 
inside the cell component. Since bacteria have a 
single chromosome, they are haploid.
Plasmid
Many bacteria contain plasmids in addition to chromosomes. These are the circular, double strand -
ed DNA molecules. They are self-replicating and are not essential f or bacterial growth and metab-
olism. They often contain drug resistant, heavy met -
als, disease and insect resistant genes on them. 
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are composed of RNA and proteins. Some may also be loosel y attached to plasma 
membranes. They are protein factories. There are thousands of rib osomes in each healthy growing 
cell. They are smaller than eukaryotic ribosomes. 
Mesosomes
The cell membrane, invaginates into the cytoplasm forming structur e called as mesosome . 
Mesosomes are’in the form of vesicles, tubules or lamellae. Mesosomes ar e involved in DNA 
replication and cell division where as some mesosomes are also invol ved in export of exocellular 
enzyme. Respiratory enzymes are also present on the mesosomes.
Granules and storage bodies
Since bacteria exist in a very competitive environment where nutrients a re usually in short supply. 
They tend to store extra nutrients when possible. These may be  glyc ogen, sulphur, fat and 
phosphate. In addition, cells contain waste materials that are  su bsequently excreted. For example, 
common waste materials are alcohol, lactic acid and acetic ac id.
Spores
Certain species of bacteria produce spores, either external to the vegetative c ells (exospores) orOther names for nucleoid are nuclear body, chromatin 
body and nuclear region.
 
It is visible in the light microscope after staining with 
Feulgen stain.
Excherichi coli closed circle chromosome measures 
approximately 1,4000 nm
Plasmids are important vectors, in modem genetic 
engineering techniques.126. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1within the vegetative cells (endospores). They are metabolically dorm ant bodies and are produced 
at a late-stage of cell growth. Spores are resistant to adverse physica l environmental conditions 
such as light, high temperature, desiccation, pH and chemical  agents, Under favorable conditions 
they germinate and form vegetative cells.
Cysts
Cysts are dormant, thick-walled, desiccation resistant forms and  develop during diferentiation of 
vegetative cells which can germinate under suitable condition. They are not heat resistant.
Nutrition of Bacteria
Like other organisms bacteria need energy for their growth, mainten ance and reproduction. Most 
bacteria are heterotrophic i.e.. they cannot synthesize their organic compounds from simple 
inorganic substances. They live either as saprophytes or as par asites. Saprophytic bacteria  get 
their food from dead organic matter. Soil is full of organic comp ounds in the form of humus. Humus 
is the material resulting from the partial decay of plants and  animals. Many soil inhabiting bacteria 
have vety extensive enzyme system that breaks down the complex substances of  humus to simpler
compounds. The bacteria can then absorb and utilize these simpler  substances as a source of 
energy. Parasitic bacteria  for their nutrition are fully dependent on their host.
Some kinds of bacteria are auotrophic  i.e., they can synthesize organic compounds which are 
necessary for their survival from inorganic substances.These ba cteria may be separated into two 
groups : photosynthetic autotrophs  and chemosynthetic autotrophs. Photosynthetic bacteria  
possess chlorophyll which difers from the chlorophyll of green p lants. Unlike most green plants, 
which have their chlorophyll in chloroplasts, bacterial chlor ophyll is dispersed in the cytoplasm. 
During photosynthesis the autotrophic bacteria utilize hydrogen sulph ide (H2S) instead of water as 
a hydrogen source and liberate sulphur instead of oxygen. Nitri fying bacteria are chemosynthetic. 
Chemosynthetic bacteria  oxidize inorganic compounds like ammonia, nitrate, nitrite, sul phur or 
ferrous iron and trap the energy thus released for their synthetic reactions. The overall reaction of 
photosynthesis in photosynthetic bacteria can be written as :
   
                                                             Light                                
                                   CO2 + 2H2S       $ (CH2O)n + H2O +2S
                                                          Chlorophyll
Green sulphur bacteria, purple sulphur bacteria and purple n on-sulphur bacteria are photosynthetic 
bacteria.136. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                                                      
Respira tion in Bacteria
Respiration in bacteria may be aerobic (requiring free oxygen) or anaerobic not requiring free 
oxygen. Bacteria, which are able to grow in the presence of oxygen , are called aerobic bacteria. While 
those which can grow in the absence of oxygen are known 
as anaerobic bacteria . Some bacteria are neither aerobic 
nor anaerobic, but facultative. Facultative bacteria  grow 
either in the presence or absence of oxygen. Some bacteria 
require a low concentration of oxygen for growth and are 
known as microaerophilic.
Growth and Reproduction
Bacterial growth refers commonly to increase in number of bacteri al cells. Bacteria increase in 
number by an asexual means of reproduction, called binary is sion. In binary ission parent cell 
enlarges, its chromosome duplicates, and plasma membrane pinch es inward at the center of the 
cell. When nuclear material has been evenly distributed, the cell wall grows inward to separate cell 
into two. This sequence is repeated at intervals by each new daugh ter cell which in turn increases 
the population of cells. Once the division is complete, bacteria grow and develop their unique 
features. The interval of time until the completion of next division is k nown as generation time.
Four distinct phases are recognized in bacterial growth curve.
Fig. 6.6 Binary Fission in bacteriaPseudomonas is an aerobic bacterium.
Spirochete is an anaerobic bacterium.
E.coli is a facultative anaerobic bacterium.
Campylobacter is a microaerophilic bacterium.146. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1      
1)     Lag phase:                       It is phase of no growth. Bacteria prepare themselves for division.
2)     Log phase:                       It is phase of r apid growth. Bacteria divide at exponential rate.
3)     Stationary phase:           Bacterial death rate is equ al to bacterial rate of  reproduction and  
                                                   multiplication.
4)     Death/Decline phase:    Bacteria start dying. Here the death rate is more than reproduction   
                                                   rate.
Bacteria lack traditional sexual reproduction and mitosis. However,  some bacteria transfer genetic 
material from a donor bacterium to a recipient during a process called conjugation . Some 
conjugating bacteria use specialized sex pili  to transfer genetic material. Conjugation produces 
new genetic combinations that may allow the resulting bacteria to s urvive under great variety of 
conditions.
IMPORTANCE OF BACTERIA
Ecological impor tance
Bacteria are ecologically very important. They are highly adapta ble as a group and are found nearly 
everywhere. They are able to decompose organic matter and play a sign iicant role in the completion 
of cycles of nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur and carbon. 
Economic Importance
Bacteria are used in number of industries, including food, drugs (production of antibiotics and 
vaccines) and in biotechnology. Bacteria are also responsible for  spoilage of food and vegetables. 
Many plant pathogens adversely afect the agricultural industry.
Medical Importance
Bacteria are very common pathogens of humans. Approximately 200 s pecies are known to cause 
diseases in humans. Many bacteria normally inhabit the bodi es of man and other animals.
Control of bacteria
Control of microorganisms is essential in home, industry as well  as in medical ields . By controlling 
microorganisms one can prevent and treat diseases. Spoilage of foods  and other industrial products 
can be inhibited by controlling microorganisms.156. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1                              Microorganisms can be con trolled by various methods.
Physical methods : In this, steam, dry heat, gas, iltration and radiation are used  to control 
bacteria. The process in which we use physical agents to control bacteria/microorganism is known 
as sterilization process . Sterilization is destruction of all life forms.
High temperature is usually used in microbiological labs for control of microbes. Both dry heat and 
moist heat are efective. Moist heat causes coagulation of proteins and ki lls the microbes. Dry heat 
causes oxidation of chemical constituents of microbes and kills th em.
Certain electromagnetic radiations below 300 nm are efective in killi ng of microorganisms. Gamma 
rays are in general used for sterilization process. 
Heat sensitive compounds like antibiotics, seras,-hormones etc. can b e sterilized by means of 
membrane ilters.
Chemical methods:  One can use antiseptics , disinfectants  and chemotherapeutic  agents 
for microbial control. Chemical substances used on living tissu es that inhibit the growth of 
microorganism are called antiseptics.
The important chemical agents used for disinfection are oxidising  and reducing agents. For example 
halogens and phenols, hydrogen peroxide, Potassium permanganate , alcohol and formaldehyde 
etc. inhibit the growth of vegetative cells and are used on nonliving ma terials.
Chemotherapeutic agents and antibiotics  work with 
natural defense and stop the growth of bacteria and 
other microbes. These are Sulfonamides, tetracycline; 
penicillin, etc. They destroy or inhibit the growth of 
microorganisms in living tissues.
Immunization and Vaccination : Methods 
of prevention and treatment that have been introduced to control microbial  diseases include 
immunization  (e.g. vaccination ), antisepsis (procedures to eliminate or reduce the possibility of 
infection), chemotherapy  and public health measures (e.g. water puriication, sewage di sposal, 
and food preservation).Microbicidal efect is one that kills the microbes 
immediately
Microbistatic inhibits the reproductive capacities of
the cells and maintains the microbial population at
constant size.
Modes oI action of diferent chemical and physical
agents of control vary. Damage can result malfunctions 
in cell wall, cell membranes, cytoplasmic enzymes, or 
nucleic acid.166. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Pasteur made many discoveries concerning the cause and prevention of  infectious diseases. In 
1880’s he isolated the bacterium responsible for chicken cholera . He grew it in a pure culture. To 
prove that he really had isolated the bacterium responsible for this  disease Pasteur made use of the 
fundamental techniques devised by Koch. He arranged experiments for  a public demonstration in 
which he repeated an experiment that had been successful in many  previous trials in his laboratory.
He inoculated healthy chicken with his pure cultures and waited for them to develop chicken 
cholera and die. But to his dismay, the chickens failed to get sick and die. Reviewing each step 
of the experiment, Pasteur found that he had accidentally used the cu ltures several weeks old 
instead of fresh one grown especially for the demonstration. He soon di scovered that somehow 
bacteria could lose their virulence, or ability to produce disease, a fter standing and growing old. But 
these attenuated, or less virulent, bacteria could still stimulate the h ost (in this case the chicken) to 
produce antibodies, substances that protect the host (in this case the  chicken) against infection due 
to subsequent exposure to the virulent organism.
Pasteur next applied this principle of inoculation with attenuated  cultures to the prevention of 
anthrax, and again it worked. He called the attenuated cultures of bacterial vaccine  (a term derived 
from the Latin Vacca , “cow”) and immunization with attenuated cultures of bacteria, vaccination.
Pasteur honoured Edward Jenner (1749-1823), who had successf ully vaccinated a boy against 
small pox in 1796. Jenner had learned that milkmaids who c ontracted cowpox from the cows, they 
milked, never subsequently contracted the much more virulent small  pox. Accordingly he tested 
this hypothesis by inoculating young James Phipps irst with c owpox causing material and later 
with small pox causing material. The boy did not get small pox . 
Then Pasteur also made a vaccine for hydrophobia , or rabies, a disease transmitted to people by 
bites from rabid dogs, cats, and other animals.
USE AND MISUSE OF ANTIBIOTICS
Antibiotics is a Greek word ( Anti-against-and Bios life) . Antibiotics are the chemotherapeutic 
chemical substances which are used in treatment of infectious dis eases. Antibiotics are synthesized 
and secreted by certain bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi. Today,  some antibiotics are synthesized 
in the laboratory. However, their origins are living cells. To determi ne drug of choice, one must176. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1know its mode of action, possible adverse side efects in 
the human beings.
Massive quantities of antibiotics are being prepared and used, which are followed by the widespread 
problems of drug resistance in microorganisms. This results in an increasing resistance against 
disease treatments. Misused antibiotics can interact with the human  metabolism and in severe 
cases can cause death of human beings. Misuse of antibiotic s uch as penicillin can cause allergic 
reactions. Similarly streptomycin can afect auditory nerve thus ca using deafness. Tetracycline and 
its related compounds cause permanent discoloration of teeth in young c hildren.
CHARACTERISTICS OF CY ANOBACTERIA
The cyanobacteria are the largest and most diverse group of photosynth etic bacteria which was 
previously known as ‘blue green algae’ . Cyanobacteria are true prokaryotes. They vary greatly in 
shape and appearance. They range in diameter from about 1-10um  and may be unicellular, exist as 
colonies of many shapes, or form ilaments  consisting of trichomes  (chains of cells) surrounded 
by mucilaginous sheath. They have normal Gram-negative type cell w all. They lack lagella and 
often use gas vesicles to move in the water, and many ilamentous species  have gliding motility.
Their photosynthetic system closely resembles that of eukaryotes because they have chlorophyll 
a and photosystem II.They carry out oxygenic photosynthesis, i.e., they use water as an electron 
donor and generate oxygen during photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria use phycobilins  as accessory 
pigments. Photosynthetic pigments and electron transport chain compon ents are located in 
thylakoid membranes linked with particles called phycobilisomes. Phycocyanin  pigment (blue) is 
their predominant phycobilin and C02 in them is assimilated through the Calvin cycle.
Reserve food material in cyanobacteria is glycogen.  Cyanobacteria reproduce by binary ission, 
fragmentation. In cyanobacteria h ormogonia, akinetes  and heterocysts  are present.Use antibiotics as prescribed by the physicians. 
Take dose at regular intervals and complete the 
treatment as advised by the doctor.186. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Fig. 6.8 Cyanobacterium Anabaena
ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
They help in reclamation of alkaline soils . Cyanobacteria have heterocysts , which are helpful in the 
ixation of atmospheric nitrogen. They release O2 in the environment due to their photosynthetic 
activity. Oscillatoria  and few other cyanobacteria 
can be used as pollution indicator. They have 
symbiotic relationship with protozoa, fungi, 
and nitrogen ixing species form associations 
with angiosperms. They are photosynthetic 
partners in most of lichen association.
Many species of cyanobacteria form water blooms  where they often impart unpleasant smell and 
due to large amount of suspended organic matter water becomes unit for consumption. Some 
species produce toxins that kill live stock and other animals tha t drink the water.
Super Blue green algae are basically expensive pond scum, in 
which cyanobacterium is a single celled organism that produ ces 
its own food through photosynthesis. It serves as a “complete 
whole food“ which contain 60% protein with all essential am ino 
acids in perfect balance.196. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1NOSTOC
Habita t and occurrence
Nostoc  is common as terrestrial and subaerial cyanobacterium. It is widely distributed in alkaline 
soils and on moist rocks and clifs. Nostoc  forms a jelly like mass in which numerous ilaments are 
embedded. 
Structure
Trichomes are unbranched and appear beaded. Individual cell s are mostly spherical but some 
times barrel shaped or cylindrical. 
All cells in trichome are mostly similar in structure but at i ntervals are found slightly large , round, 
light yellowish thick walled cells called as heterocysts.  Trichome mostly breaks near heterocyst 
and forms hormogonia and thus help in fragmentation.
Reproduction
There is no sexual reproduction but it reproduces asexually by for mation of hormogonia. 
Hormogonia are formed when ilament break at diferent points into smal ler pieces.This is due to 
death and decay of the ordinary cell or the heterocyst may serve as a breaking point. Reproduction 
can also be due to akinete formation. Akinetes  are thick walled , enlarged vegetative cells which 
accumulate food and become resting cells. On arrival of favourabl e conditions they form normal 
vegetative cell.206. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1Q.1.            Fill in the blanks.
                    (i)          A bacterial arrangement in packets of eight cells  is described as a-------------.
                    (ii)         The shape and arrang ement of is diplococci
                    (iii)        Pili are tubular sha fts in bacteria that serve as a means of-----------.
                    (iv)        -------------- are un usual type of bacteria that live in extreme habitats.
                    (v)         ------------- is a b acterium that is photosynthetic.
                    (vi)        -------------- is a cyanobacterium.
                    (vii)       ---------------- cal led as bloom forming organism.
                    (vii)       Use of antibiotics is one of the means of controlling ------------- diseases.
Q.2.           Short questions.
                  (i)              (a) Name general ch aracteristics that could be used to deine the prokaryotes.
                                   (b) Do any other micr obial groups besides bacteria have prokaryotic cells?
                                   (c) In what habita ts are bacteria found? Give some general means by 
                                   which bacteria deri ve nutrients.
                  (ii)            (a) List functions th at the cell membrane performs in bacteria.
                                  (b) What are mesosomes and some of their possible functions?
                  (iii)            What is unique abou t the structure of bacterial ribosomes?
 
                  (iv)            Draw the three bacterial shapes.
                  (v)            Name a bacterium that h as no cell wall.
                  (vi)           A gram stained disch arge from an dbcess shows cocci in irregular grape 
                                   like clusters. Wha t is the most likely genus of this bacterium
                  (vii)           Draw an outline and la bel (i) streptobacilli, (ii) diplococci,
                                   (iii) staphylococci .                                                                  EXERCISE216. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1           
                  (viii)          You observe a culture of predominantly round (presumably spherical) bacteria 
                                   that though apparently  fully divided, nevertheless have failed to separate, thus     
                                   resulting in long c hains of cells. What, generally, might you call such an  
                                   arrangement?
(ix)         Match the following descriptions with the best answ er.
                                (a) Division in one plan e; cocci arranged in pairs                         (a)  Bacillus
                                (b) Division in one plan e; cocci arranged in chains                      (b) S treptobacillus
                                (c) Division in two plan es; cocci arranged in a
                                     square of four
                                                                                                                                              (c) Spirochete
                                (d) Division in one plan e; rods completely separate
                                      after division.                                                                                (d) Spirillum
                                (e)  Division in one plan e; rods arranged in chains.                     (e) Vib rio
                                (f) A comma shaped ba cterium                                                       (f) Streptococcus
                                (g) A thin, lexible  spiral.                                                                    (g) Staphylococcus
                                (h) A thick, rigid s piral.                                                                       (h) Diplococcus
                                                                                                                                               (i) Tetrad
                                                                                                                                               (j) Sarcin a
Q.3.           Extensive Questions
                  (i)           Describe in detail the stru cture of bacterial cell wall, emphasizing Gram positive     
                                and Gram negative properti es.
                  (ii)          Write an account of difer ent methods used for controlling microbes.
                  (iii)         Discuss the role of antibi otics and immunization in controlling bacterial diseases. 
                                 What problem can aris e due to misuse of antibiotics.
                  (iv)         Describe general characteris tics of Cyanobacteria with special reference to 
                                Nostoc.226. Kingdom prokaryotae(Monera) eLearn.Punjab
V: 1.1          (v)           Write Notes on :
                                (a)     Koch’s postula tes                             (b)           Shape of bacteria
                                (c)     Flagella and  pili                                 (d)           Growth in bacteria.