CHAPTER
17  Coordination And
Control
Animation 17 : Neuron
Source & Credit: Wikispaces217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
INTRODUCTION
All organisms show certain common characteristics - one of them i s to respond to stimuli. These 
stimuli may be internal or external, at molecular, sub-cellula r, cellular or organism level - to which 
the organisms respond. The activities of diferent body parts in resp onse to these stimuli must be 
coordinated. The coordination makes possible the integration of func tions essential to organismic 
behaviour.
Coordination is must for any organism to survive. In the unicellu lar organisms coordination exists 
between various cellular processes, and they respond to changes in th eir environments such as 
temperature, light intensity, concentration of various chemicals and  even to electric current.
In multi-cellular organisms, although there is a division of labour among cells yet every cell can 
respond to changes in its immediate vicinity. It must be noted that even the most highly developed 
organisms, e.g.’we humans are unable to detect and respond to man y changes or stimuli in our 
environment. We are unaware and not able to respond to presence of ba cteria on the surface of 
our body, because our sensory cells do not detect their presence - b ut some of our internal body 
cells do respond and produce chemicals or phagocytose them to destroy  them. We are unable to 
see diferent radiations except for visible spectrum of light, but our body cells do respond to some 
of them.
Animation 17.1: Coordination and Control317. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
COORDINATION IN PLANTS
CONTROL THROUGH HORMONES
Plants, as compared to animals, are far from being passive,  and are complex dynamic organisms 
that grow, change, react (to external/internal stimuli, and show r esponse. It is no exaggeration 
to say that plants behave - but their behaviour is fundamentally di ferent from that of animals. 
The diference is due to two ways of life - sessile on one hand and motile on the other. Much of 
the behaviour of plants depends on variations in growth rates, or cha nges in the turgidity of cells, 
when they show movement. The most obvious diference is in the slow speed of  response shown 
by plants.
Animals have evolved tissues like muscles, specialized for produ ction of rapid movements. Plants 
and animals employ diferent ways to respond and have evolved control s ystems accordingly. In 
plants the control is solely by the plant hormones while in animal s much more variety of hormones 
and the nervous control, make them respond with greater speed to speciic stimuli.
Hormonal control in plants is relatively a slow process. Even after hormone is synthesized, there is 
a delay between the release, its arrival at the target cells, and its action in the body. So, response 
to stimulus that induced the secretion of hormone is usually not im mediate. Keeping in view 
the slowness of the mechanisms of plant movement, the delay involved in hormonal control is 
insigniicant. All the activities of plants from growth to fruit pr oduction and ripening, are under the 
control of plant hormones.
Plants therefore, respond to the stimuli by:
1. Regulating their growth and development in appropriate ways.
2. Controlling their body functions through plant hormones or growth  hormones.
PLANT MOVEMENTS
You have studied these in the previous chapter. Many plants do not show  locomotion (movement 
of the whole organism). However, movements of plant organs are possible and are modiied 
according to the nature and intensity of external stimuli. There are two kinds of plant movements, 
autonomic movements and paratonic movements.417. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL STRESSES IN PLANTS
All plants need water, light, carbon dioxide and a variety of nu trients from their environment 
for optimal development and growth. The absence or short supply of a ny of these factors in 
environment may exert environmental stresses on plants afecting their heal th and survival. If 
plants are grown without light, they become extremely long and fai l to form chlorophyll. They are 
said to be etiolated .
Many plants take on a yellowish hue when they fail to form suici ent chlorophyll. This condition 
known as chlorosis  is usually arises from short supplies, of mineral nutrients in the soil.
DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENS IN PLANTS
Diseases of plants may arise from infections by viruses, bacteria , fungi or lichens in most cases. 
You have already studied diferent diseases caused by the above mentioned  pathogens in class XI.
Plants may also show developmental abnormalities. If plants are  wounded, they often develop 
masses of amorphous material with very poor diferentiation known as calluses . Plant tumors 
and even plant cancers may arise and spread through the plant as an amorphous invasion of 
surrounding well diferentiated tissues. Galls  are growths on a plant that are induced by parasites 
and have usually highly organized growth e.g. The tumors in duced by bacteria. They are usually 
less diferentiated than other types of galls.
Animation 17.2: Defense against pathogens in platns517. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS
In living things, the behavior activities occur at regular intervals  which are called biorhythms  or 
biological rhythms . Biorhythms may occur showing periodicity of about 24-hours. These are called 
circadian (Latin circa =about, dies =day) which means ab out one day, so they are also called diurnal 
rhythms.
If the biorhythms are of about 365 days, these rhythms in activity  are called circannual.
The organisms come across environmental changes that are cyclic al in nature such as days, tides, 
and seasons etc. Many organisms maintain internal rhythm or c lock, to predict the onset of the 
periodic changes and to keep them prepared for these changes. 
Biorhythms may be the result of the following:
1. There may be direct response to various changes in the external (ex ogenous) stimuli.
2. There may be an internal (endogenous) rhythm that progresses the organism’s behaviour in  
     synchronicity w ith the exogenous temporal period, particula rly a 24 hour or a 365 day period.
3. The synchronization mechanism may be a combination of 1 an d 2.
The rhythms are in one’s genes but the environment inluences the rhythm s to some extent. Thus 
timing of behavior results from a combination of efects of rhythmica l internal processes and timed 
events of the environment.
PLANT GROWTH REGULATORY 
SUBSTANCES
Some of the special substances produced by the plants 
which inluence the growth and plant responses to 
various stimuli are given below.Basic period of the clock is innate. Ervin 
Bunning of the University of Tubingen, 
Germany has shown that exposure of 
fruit ly Drosophila  to constant conditions 
for 15 consecutive generations fails to 
eliminate the essentially 24 hr. rhythm of 
this insect.617. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
(a ) Auxins : These are indole acetie acid (IAA) or its varients.
• In stem, promote cell enlargement in region behind apex. Promote cell  division in cambium.
• In root, promote growth at very low concentrations. Inhibit growth at hig her concentrations, e.g.  
geotropism. Promote growth of roots from cuttings and calluses.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots but sometimes antagonistic to cytokinin s and is inhibitory.
• Promote apical dominance and fruit growth. They can sometimes ind uce parthenocarpy.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence (aging) in a few species.
• Inhibit abscission.
Commercial applications:  Discovery of IAA led to the synthesis of wide range of compounds by  
chemists. The synthetic auxins are economical than IAA to produc e and often more active because 
plants generally do not have necessary enzymes to break them down.
Synthetic auxins
NAA (Naphthalene acetic acid)
Indole propionic acidStimulates fruiting - help natural fruit set. 
Sometimes causes fruit setting in absence of 
pollination (parthenocarpy)
2,4 D (2,4 Dichloro phenoxy acetic acid) Selective weed killer Kill s broad leaved species
(dicots). Used in cereal crops and lawns to 
eliminate weeds.
Inhibits sprouting of potatoes.
Prevents premature fruit drop (retards 
abscission)717. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
(b) Gibberellin: These are produced commercially from fungal cultures.
• Promote cell enlargement in the presence of auxins. Also promote cell d ivision in apical meristem 
and cambium.
• Promote ‘bolting’ of some rosette plants.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots of chrysanthemum callus.
• Promote leaf growth and fruit growth. May induce parthenocarpy.
• In apical dominance, enhance action of auxins.
• Break bud and seed dormancy.
• Sometimes may substitute for red light. Therefore, promote lowering in longday plants, while 
inhibit in short-day plants.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence in a few species.
Commercial applications: Some of their commercial applications are as under.
1.  GA promote fruit setting e.g. in tangerines and pears and are used for growing seedless grapes 
     (parthenocarpy) and also increase the berry size.
2.  GA3 is used in the brewing industry to stimulate a-amylase produ ction in barley and this promotes
     malting.
3. To delay ripening and improve storage life of bananas and g rape fruits.
(c) Cytokinins:
• Promote stem growth by cell division in apical meristem and camb ium.
• Inhibit primary root growth.
• Promote lateral root growth.
• Promote bud initiation and leaf growth.
• Promote fruit growth but can rarely induce parthenocarpy.
• Promote lateral bud growth, also break bud dormancy.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence.
• Promote stomatal opening.817. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Commercial application: Cytokinins delay aging of fresh leaf crops, such as cabbag e and 
lettuce (delay of senescence) as well as keeping lowers fresh. They can also be used to break 
dormancy of some seeds.
(d) Abscisic acid :
• Inhibits stem and root growth notably during physiological stress , e.g. drought, and waterlogging.
• Promotes bud and seed dormancy.
• Promotes lowering in short day plants, and inhibits in long d ay plants (antagonistic to gibberellins).
• Sometimes promotes leaf senescence.
• Promotes abscission.
• Promotes closing of stomata under conditions of water stress (wilting) .
Commercial application:  Abscisic acid can be sprayed on tree crops to regulate fruit dr op at 
the end of the season. This removes the need for picking over a larg e time-span.
(e) Ethene:
• Inhibits stem growth, notably during physiological stress.
• Inhibits root growth.
• Breaks dormancy of bud.
• Promotes lowering in pineapple.
• Promotes fruit ripening.
Commercial application:  Ethene induces lowering in pineapple. Stimulates ripening of 
tomatoes and citrus fruit. The commercial compound ethephon breaks d own to release ethene in 
plants and is applied to rubber plant to stimulate the low of latex.
CO-ORDINATION IN ANIMALS
It is brought about in higher animals by nervous co-ordination a nd chemical co-ordination.917. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
NERVOUS CO-ORDINATION
This type of co-ordination involves specialised cells or neurons l inked together directly or via the 
central nervous system, to form network that connects the cell or organs w hich receive stimuli 
(receptors) and those which carry out actions or responses (efectors).  The neuron has the capacity 
to generate and conduct impulses which travel across the synapse an d pass from the receptors to 
the efectors, brings about nervous coordination. The elements of nervous sy stem which help in 
co-ordination are:
1.              Receptors.                  2.             Neurons                   3.              Efectors.
1. Receptors
The neuron ibres and cell bodies can be excited by small electric  shocks, mechanical, chemical, 
light and temperature stimuli. Receptors detect changes in the externa l and internal environment 
of the animal. The receptor may be a cell, or neuron ending or a receptor organ. Receptors are 
classiied as follows :
(a) Chemoreceptors: These are for smell taste and for blood CO2 oxygen, glucose, amino acids and 
      fatty acid (e.g. receptors in the hypothalamus)
(b) Mechanoreceptors:  These detect stimuli of touch pressure, hearing and equilibrium (eg. Free 
      nerve endings + expanded lip endings + stray endings)  !
(c) Photoreceptors (electromagnetic receptors), these respond to stimuli of light for exa mple in 
     eyes, rods and cones.
(d) Thermoreceptors:  These are free nerve endings. These show response to cold and warmth .
(e) Nociceptors:  (Undiferentiated endings) which produce the sensation of pain.1017. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Each type of the principal type of sensation that 
we can experience pain, touch, sight, sound 
and so forth are called modalities of sensation. 
Yet despite the fact that we experience these 
diferent modalities of sensation; nerve ibres 
transmit only impulses. How is it that diferent 
nerve ibres transmit diferent modalities of 
sensation? The answer to this question is:
1. Each nerve tract terminates at a speciic point in the CNS; and the ty pe of sensation is determined 
by the point in the nervous system to which the ibre leads. So touch sti mulus is carried by nerve 
impulse in the ‘touch’ area of the brain. Similarly ibres from  the eyes (retina) terminate in the  
visual cortex of the brain.
2. Moreover, each receptor organ is specialised to receive a particular typ e of stimulus and this is 
carried to the particular area of the brain. There are many receptors which respond to the 
mechanical conditions of the internal organs. 
Examples are the receptors of the stomach wall 
which may be concerned with arousal of ‘hunger’; 
stretch receptors in the carotid and aortic arteries 
of tetrapods have important roles in the regulation 
of blood pressure; endings with similar properties 
are found in the branchial vessels of ishes.
Animation17.5: Neuroanim
Source and Credit:pia-magazine1117. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Working of Sensory Receptors with Special Reference to Skin
In the skin there are at least 3 diferent types of sensory endings in volved in touch stimulus reception. 
In skin, the receptors are concerned with atleast ive diferent senses: tou ch, pressure, heat, cold 
and pain.
1. Situated at the base of hairs, hair end organs receive touch stim ulus.
2. Meissner’s corpuscles (encapsulated endings) which lie in  papillae which extend into the ridges 
    of the ingertips. The corpuscle consists of spiral and muc h twisted endings, each of which ends   
    in a knob. These are touch receptors.
3. Pacinian corpuscles - situated quite deep in the body. Thes e are also encapsulated neuron  
    endings and receive deep pressure stimulus. Those located in th e limbs probably form a basis  
    for vibration sense.
The intensity of stimulus received would either be transmitted in the f orm of repeated impulses or 
by more ibres carrying the impulse to the CNS.
The relative abundance of various types of receptors difers greatly  e. g. pain receptors are nearly 27 
times more abundant than cold receptors. The cold receptors are nearl y 10 times more abundant 
than heat or temperature receptors. The receptors are not distributed evenl y over the entire surface 
of the body e.g. touch receptors are much more numerous in the inger ti ps than in the skin of the 
back, as might be expected in view of the normal functions of those tw o parts of the body.
The stimulus received by the receptors in the skin which are th e endings of sensory neurons is 
passed to the motor neurons via inter or associative neurons which are present in the brain and 
via spinal cord impulse is sent by the motor neurons to the efectors, w hich are muscles and glands 
(Fig. 17.1).The detection of vibrations of the ground by terrestrial vertebrates is prob ably achieved by 
receptors in the joints.1217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
2. Neurons
The chief structural and functional units of the nervous system a re neurons, but there are other 
cells, in higher animals, and in humans called neuroglia , which make up as much as half of the 
nervous system. Neuroglia play a vital role in the nutrition of neu rons and their protection by 
myelin sheath. There are three functional types of neurons-the sensory , associative (intermediate/
relay) and motor neurons, in mammals (Fig. 17.2)Fig. 17.1 Sensory receptors of the skin. 
The sensations of touch, pressure, heat, cold, and pain are detected by modiied sensory neurons 
having naked nerve endings (touch and pain receptors) or specia lized cellular corpuscles (pressure, 
hot and cold receptors).1317. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Fig 17.2 Avariety of neuron types in human, beings.
(a) The dendrites unlike the axon, often give a spiny look. (b)T he dendrites of certain brain cells 
branch profusely, giving cell a treelike appearance, (c) Motor n eurons have long axons that run 
from the C. nervous system to the efector (muscle); these axons are frequen tly,”but not always 
myelinated. Note the presence of many granules ip the cell body and dendrites and their absence
from the axon.(d) Many sensory neurons have only one iber, which branches a short distance 
from the cell body, one branch (peripheral) running between the rec eptor site and the dorsal-root 
ganglion in which the cell body is located, and the other branch  (central) running from the ganglion 
into the spinal cord or brain. Except for its terminal portions, th e entire iber is structurally and 
functionally of the axon type, even ‘though the peripheral branch c  mducts impulses toward the 
cell body. A sensory neuron of this type thus has no true dendrites a though the peripheral branch 
is often called a dendron because of the direction in which it con ducts impulses.1417. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
The neuron has protoplasmic processes arising from its cell body  containing nucleus and various 
organelle embedded in the cytoplasm. There are two main types of cytopl asmic processes or ibres. 
The one which carry impulse towards cell body is called  dendron , if it is a single ibre but if smaller 
ibres _they are called dendrites (singular: dendrite). The processes conducting impulses away 
from cell body are termed axons. These may be more than a meter lon g in some neurons. Nissl’s 
granules  which are groups of ribosomes associated with rough E.R, and Golgi apparatus are present 
in the cell body. Microtubules, neuroibrils, rough endoplasmic recticulum and mitochondria are 
present throughout the axoplasm (cytoplasm of axon) of the neuron.
The cell body or soma is the main nutritional part of the cell a nd is concerned with the biosynthesis 
of materials necessary for the growth and maintenance of the neuron . If the cell body of the neuron 
remains intact, it can regenerate axonal and dendrite ibres; but n eurons once mature, do not 
divide any further. 
3. Efectors
These are the structures which respond when they are stimulated b y impulse coming via motor 
neuron. The principal efectors are glands, which respond by s ecreting; and muscles which respond 
by contracting. Flow of information through the nervous system is ex plained with the help of a 
relex arc.
Relex Arc
Flow of impulse through the nervous system involving receptors, neurons,  and efectors will be 
clear if we study an example of a relex arc.1517. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 17.3 The pain-withdrawal relex
This simple relex circuit includes each of the four elements of a neural pathway. (1) The sensory 
neuron has pain-sensitive endings in the skin and a long iber  leading to the spinal cord. That 
neuron stimulates (2) an association neuron in the spinal cord , which in turn stimulates (3) a motor
neuron, also in the cord. The axon of the motor neuron carries action potentials to (4) muscles, 
causing them to contract and withdraw the body part from the dam aging stimulus. The sensory 
neuron also makes a synapse on association neurons not involved in th e relex that carry signals to
the brain, informing it of the danger.1617. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Relex arc is the path way of passage of impulse during a relex  action. Relex action is a type of 
involuntary action. (Fig. 17.3). The direction of stimulus is from receptors to sensory neuron to 
associative (association / relay) neuron and then through motor neuron  to the efectors.
Animation17.7: Relex rotuline
Source and Credit: Corpshumain1717. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
 Nerve Impulse
Nerve impulse is a wave of electrochemical changes, which travels along the length of the neuron 
involving chemical reactions and movement of ions across the cellmemb rane. Electrical potential 
is a measure of the capacity to do electrical work. It represents a  type of stored energy which is- 
manifested during separation of charges across a barrier. In the case of neuron, the charges are 
positive and negative ions, and the charge separating barrier is  the plasma membrane. The electrical 
potential that exists across a cell membrane is known as membrane potential . A typical neuron 
at rest is more positive electrically outside than inside the cell membr ane. This net diference in 
charge between the inner and the outer surface of a non-conducting neuron is called the resting 
membrane potential.  The major factors which are involved in resting membrane potential are:
1. Sodium and potassium ions:  Of the many kinds of ions present in the nerve cells and the 
surrounding luid, sodium (Na+) and potassium (K+) ions are the most important. Sodium ions are 
tenfold higher in concentration outside than inside the membrane s urface, whereas potassium ions 
are twenty times more concentrated inside than outside. All the neurons have very active sodium 
and potassium pumps located in their cell membranes. Driven by the splitting of ATP, these pumps 
transport Na+ out and K+ into the cell, both against their respective concentration gradients.  For 
every two K+ that are actively transported inward, three Na+ are pumped out. So inside becomes 
more negative than the outside ofthe cell membrane o f neurons. (Fig. 17 .4)
2. Negative organic ions:  The large negative organic ions (such as proteins, organic aci ds etc) 
are much more inside the membrane than outside, where they are only i n negligible concentration. 
This makes the inside of neuron membrane more negative.
3. Leakage of K+ ions from neurons: The cell membrane is virtually impermeable to all ions 
except K+. Since the membrane is slightly permeable to K+, some of it leaks out of the cell. The loss 
of this positive ion from the neuron by difusion accounts for more neg ative’charges inside than 
outside the cell membrane of neuron.
4. No conduction of nerve impulse1817. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 17.4 Resting potential
(a) In the unstimulated state, a neuron has a membrane potential of approximately - 70mV. The 
relative concentrations of the principal ions inside and outside the neuron are indicated by the sizes 
of the chemical’”symbols (Na+ = sodium ion, K+ = potassium i on), (b) Two of the major processes 
that contribute to the negative resting potential are the active exchange of N a+ for K+, .and the 
outward difusion of K+. The sodium - potassium pump actively tr ansports Na+ out and K+ into the 
cell, and is powered by the splitting of ATP by an associated enzyme, ATPase.
Initiation of nerve impulse:  Under normal conditions a nerve impulse is initiated by an 
appropriate stimulus (called threshold stimulus) applied at on e end of the neuron and it results in 
a remarkable localized change in the resting mefmbrane potential.1917. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
It disappears for a brief instant and is replaced by a new p otential called action  or active membrane  
potential which is in the form of impulse. During this state, the i nner membrane surface becomes 
more positive than the outside. This change is so brief (for perhaps  a millisecond) that only a 
portion of the neuron is in the active membrane potential state. 
The major factors involved in changing the resting membrane potentia l to active membrane 
potential are: (Fig 17.5)
1. Na+ and K+ ions movement: The passage of nerve impulse is associated with increase in 
permeability of Na+ ions moving inwards upsetting the potential momentarily, making th e inside 
more positive than outside. Neurophysiologists believe that the increased permeability is due to 
the opening of speciic pores in the membrane, termed “sodium gates”. When these gates open, 
sodium ions rush into the neuron by difusion. Some K+ moves out.
2. Charges are reversed:  The inner side of the cell membrane has excess of positive ions (thu s 
positive charges) at its internal surface, and the outer surface b ecomes more negative.Animation17.8: Diporepol
Source and Credit: cybercuba2017. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
17.5 Active or action potential
(a) When a neuron is stimulated, the cell membrane at the point of stimulation undergoes a 
momentary reversal in charge (dark color) called an action potenti al. Perhaps for a millisecond, 
the inside of the membrane becomes positive relative to the outside, (b) Seq uence of membrane 
potential changes associated with an action potential: (1) resting p otential (polarized state); (2) 
sodium gates open and Na+ difuses into the cell, causing a depol arization of the membrane; (3) 
; sodium gates close and potassium gates open; (4) K+ difuses ou t, causing a repolarization of 
the membrane; (5) sodium - potassium pump restores original ion gradients and resting potential 
(recovery). Steps (2) - (5) take a mere 2- - 3 milliseconds.2117. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
The normal speed of nerve impulse in humans is 100 meters per sec ond but maximum speed 
recorded is 120 meters per second.3. Passage of nerve impulse:  During active membrane potential, the neuron conducts the 
impulse in the form of nerve impulse.
4. Membrane potential:  Active membrane potential of +0.05 volts (+50mv) exists. 
These changes occur along the length of neuron till the impulse reac hes synapse. Soon after passage 
of the impulse, the resting membrane potential is restored by the movement of a small number of 
ions especially K+ moving out. This neuron now is ready to conduc t another impulse.
It may be added that in myelinated neurons the impulse jumps fr om node to node (node of Ranvier). 
This is called saltatory impulse.
Synapse
Consecutive neurons are so arranged that the axon endings of one neuron  are connected to the 
dendrites of the next neuron. There is no cytoplasmic connection between the two neurons and 
microscopic gaps are left between them. Each of these contact points is known as synapse.  
A single neuron may form synapses with many incoming ibres of diferent neurons. 
A nerve impulse is passed from one neuron to the other through the syn apse, but a single impulse 
does not necessarily get across the synapse. It may take two or three impulses arriving in rapid 
succession or perhaps simultaneously from two or more ibres to start an impulse in the next 
neuron.
The action potential cannot jump from one neuron to the next in line; ra ther the message is 
transmitted across synapse in the form of chemical messenger c alled neurotransmitter.2217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
When an impulse reaches a synaptic knob, synaptic vesicles wi thin fuse with the presynaptic 
membrane, causing the release of neurotransmitter molecules into the sy naptic cleft. The 
neurotransmitter molecules bind to the receptors, on the postsynaptic mem brane, triggering an 
action potential in the postsynaptic neuron, by causing changes in its permeability to certain ions. 
(Fig. 17.6)Fig 17.6 Communication across a synapse
a
b2317. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Neurotransmitters are chemicals which are released at the axon endi ng of the neurons, at synapse. 
Many diferent types of neurotransmitters are known. These are: acetylc holine, adrenaline, nor-
epinephrine, serotonin and dopamine. 
Acetylcholine is the main transmitter for synapses that lie outside the central nervous system. 
Others are mostly involved in synaptic transmission within the br ain and spinal cord.
Evolution of Nervous System
There are two designs of nervous system in the animal kingdom.
1. A difused nervous system, such as that of Cnidarians (Hydra,  jelly ish and their relatives)
2. A centralized nervous system, found to varying degrees in more complex  organisms, from 
platyhelminthes to chordates including humans.
To understand the organization of the above mentioned types of nervous sys tem, we would study 
them in Hydra , Planaria and humans. Nervous system design is highly co-related with the animal’s 
life style. The irst main type of nervous system is a difused nervou s system. Hydra shows this type 
of nervous system (Fig. 17.7a).
Hydra,  a cnidarian, is a small animal which is sedentary in  its life style and prey and other dangers 
are equally likely to come from any direction. Its nervous system c onsists of a network of neurons, 
which is present between the ectoderm and endoderm. There is no head  in this animal and so 
there is no centralized nervous system i.e. no brain and nerve cord s etc. However, a cluster cell of 
bodies of neuron’s forming ganglia can be seen here and there. I t has been observed that neurons 
are so arranged in the network that it is not possible to distinguish  them in connected functional 
types of neurons as in higher animals i.e. there are no sensory,  associative (inter/relay) neurons, 
or motor neurons, there are no specialized sense, organs in this ani mal. It has been observed and
studied that when an appropriate stimulus is given, Hydra  responds - and almost the whole body 
of the animal responds as a unit. The tentacles are more responsive and react to the stimulus 
instantaneously (Fig. 17.7a).2417. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
The second type of nervous system is present in Planaria (Fig. 17 .7b) and humans. It is centralized 
nervous system. The nervous system of Planaria  is better developed as compared with that of 
Hydra  because in Planaria :
(i)   There is beginning of a centralized nervous system. In th e anterior brain region of the body of 
planaria,   
        there is a bilobed mass composed of two ganglia. This acts as a ‘‘brairr “or a centralized collection 
      of neurons. This receives and sends impulses from and to diferent parts of the body. There is 
       no such concentration of neurons or a coordinating centre i n Hydra  - only a network of neurons   
      is present.
(ii)  There is diferentiation of neurons into sensory associative and  motor neurons. In Planaria ,       
      associative neurons are present in the brain and longitudi nal nerves. Sensory neurons carry           
      impulse to ‘brain’ or nerves and motor neurons carry imp ulse from central nervous system to         
      diferent parts of the body. In Hydra there is no diferentiation of neurons. 
(iii) In Planaria  at the anterior region, sense organs in the form of eyes and chemor eceptors are 
      present. There are no specialized sensory organs in Hydra . 
(iv)  The receptor cells sensitive to pressure and touch-are present in  Planaria . There are no       
       specialized sensory cells in Hydra , but some nerve cells are moo, sensitive, to a particular 
       stimulus - chemical or mechanical, than others.
(v)  There are deinite nerves, the longitudinal and lateral in Pla naria. There are no nerves in Hydra.
(vi) In Planaria  in addition to a supericial nerve net just below epidermis, there is  a deeper plexus 
      embedded in the parenchyma. In Hydra  only a supericial nerve net is present (Fig 17.7a).
Fig. 17.7 Nervous systems in Hydra and Planaria.2517. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM
Human nervous system is a type of centralized nervous system. Its cl assiication in diferent 
subdivisions and diferent functions performed by these subdivision s are given in Fig 17.8.17.8 Classiication of the human nervous system2617. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Central Nervous System (CNS)
The CNS consists of brain (Fig. 17.9) and spinal cord, w hich are both protected in three ways. Cranium, 
which is a part of skull, protects the brain and neural arc hes, of vertebrae of vertebral column 
protect the spinal cord. The brain and spinal cord are also p rotected by triple layers of meninges. 
The cerebrospinal luid (CSF), similar in composition to blood p lasma, bathes the neurons of brain 
and spinal cord and it cushions against the bumps and jolts . Both brain and spinal cord are hollow. 
The spinal cord has central canal and brain has many ca vities (ventricles) illed by CSF, which is also 
present between the meninges. 
Brain:  The brain can be divided into forebrain, midbrain and hindb rain. Forebrain is further divided 
into three functional parts, the thalamus, the limbic system (Fig.  17.10) and the cerebrum. Thalamus 
carries sensory information to the limbic system and cerebrum. Th e information includes sensory 
input from auditory and visual pathways, from the skin and f rom within the body.
The limbic system is located in an arc between the thalamus and  cerebrum. Limbic system works 
together to produce our most basic and primitive emotions, drives, and b ehaviours, including 
fear, rage, tranquillity, hunger, thirst, pleasure and sexual  responses. Portion of limbic system is 
also important in the formation of memories. The limbic system consi sts of hypothalamus, the 
amygdala, and hippocampus, as well as nearby regions of cerebrum. The hypothalamus through 
its hormone production and neural connections acts as a major co- ordinating centre controlling 
body temperature, hunger, the menstrual cycle, water balance, the s leep-wake cycle etc.
n the amygdala, clusters of neurons produce sensation of pleasur e, punishment or sexual arousal 
when stimulated. It is also involved in the feelings of fear and  rage.2717. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
I
Hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of long term memory, and thus is required 
for learning. Cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and i s divided into two halves, called cerebral 
hemispheres. These halves communicate with each other by means of a large band of axons, called 
corpus callosum. 17.9 The human brain
A section through the 
midline of the human brain
reveals some of its major 
structures.
17.10 The limbic system 
and thalamus
The limbic system extends 
through several brain 
regions. It seems to be the 
center of most unconscious 
emotional behaviors, such 
as love, hatred, hunger, 
sexual responses, and fear. 
The thalamus is a crucial 
relay center among the 
senses, the limbic system, 
and the cerebral cortex.2817. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Tens of billions of neurons are packed into this part. The outer reg ion, the cerebral cortex, forms 
folds called convolutions, which greatly increase its surface area. This part receives sensory 
information, processes it, stores some in memory for future use, di rects voluntary movements, 
and is responsible for the poorly understood process that we call thi nking.
The cerebral cortex contains primary sensory areas where signal s originating in sensory organs 
such as eyes and ears are received and converted into subjective imp ressions, such as light and 
sound. Nearby association areas interpret this information. This  area is also involved in speech 
and also receives and interprets sensations of touch from all parts  of the body. This area is also a 
centre for sending impulses to voluntary muscles, controlling movements . This is also involved in 
intelligence, reasoning and judgement.
The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right side of the body, and  right cerebral hemisphere 
controls the left side of the body. Midbrain  is reduced in humans, and it contains auditory relay 
centre and centre that controls relex movements of eyes. Midbrain contains  reticular formation, 
which is a relay centre connecting hindbrain with the forebra in. Reticular formation is very 
important in screening the input information, before they reach hi gher brain centres. Hindbrain  
includes the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Medulla controls severa l automatic functions, such as 
breathing, Heart rate, blood pressure and swallowing. Certain n eurons in pons, located above the 
medulla, appear to inluence transitions between sleep and wakefulnes s, and the rate and pattern 
of breathing. The cerebellum is important in co-ordinating movements  of the body. The cerebellum 
guides, smooth and accurate motions and maintains body position. The cerebellum is also involved 
in the learning and memory storage for behaviours. It is best devel oped in bird , which is engaged 
in the complex activity of light.
Spinal Cord:  Medulla oblongata narrows down into an oval shaped hollow cylind er, the spinal 
cord, running through the vertebral column. It is made up of a ver y large number of neurons, the 
cell-ibres and bodies of which are arranged in a deinite patter n. In cross section, the spinal cord 
shows an inner butterly shaped grey matter, containing a central canal and the outer portion 
composed of white matter. Gray matter, as in other parts of nervous system  consists of cell bodies 
and non-myelinated nerve ibres or tracts. White matter is made up of myelinated nerve ibres or 
tracts.2917. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
The spinal cord is the centre for great many relexes and it serves a s a pathway for conduction of 
impulses to and from diferent parts of the body and brain (Fig 17.11).
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) 
It comprises of sensory neurons and motor neurons, which may for m ganglia and the nerves. 
Ganglia are the concentrations of cell bodies of neurons. The nerves  are the bundles of axons or 
dendrites, bounded by connective tissue. They may be sensory motor or mixed nerves depending 
upon the direction of impulse they conduct. In humans, there are 1 2 pairs of nerves, which arise 
from the brain, or lead to the brain. These nerves are called cerebral or cranial nerves . Some of 
these nerves are sensory, some motor, and some are mixed. From the spin al cord 31 pairs of spinal 
nerves arise or lead to spinal cord. All these nerves are mixed havin g ibres of both sensory and 
motor neurons.
17.11 The Spinal cord3017. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Motor neurons form somatic nervous system, which controls voluntary movem ents, which are 
under the conscious control of the body, involving skeletal muscles. M otor neurons also form 
autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary responses by in luencing organs, glands 
and smooth muscles. The autonomic nervous system is further divided into sympathetic nervous 
system and para sympathetic nervous system (Fig 17.9).
Autonomic Nervous System
The motor neurons of autonomic nervous system are divided into the sympa thetic and para 
sympathetic system. Both of these systems function automatically, in nervate all internal organs, 
utilize two neurons and one ganglion for each impulse.
Sympathetic system : Most ganglion ibres of the sympathetic system arise from the middl e 
protion of the spinal cord and almost terminate in ganglia that li e near the cord. This system is 
important during emergency situations and is associated with “ig ht or light.” This system accelerates 
the heart beat, dilates the pupil and inhibits the digestion of food etc .
Parasympathetic system :  A few cranial nerves including the vagus nerve together with 
the nerves from the bottom portion of spinal cord, form the parasympath etic nervous system. It 
promotes all the internal responses which are associated with the r elaxed state i.e. contraction 6f 
the pupils, promotes digestion of food, retards heart beat etc.
Nervous Disorders
Following are some of the common disorders of nervous system in huma ns: 
1. Parkinson’s disease : It is a nervous disorder, characterized by involuntary tremors, d iminished 
motor power and rigidity. The mental faculties are not afected. The d isease is believed to be caused 
by cell death in a brain area that produces dopamine. Onset of disease is usually in 50’s and 60’s. 
The disease is slowly progressive; the patient may live for many yea rs. The disease may result by 
head trauma. Efective drugs are available such as L- dopa. A naturally occuring protein called glial 
cell-line derived: neurotrophic factor (GDNF) has been shown to boost uptake’ofdopamine, when 
delivered to lab. rats and monkeys. GDNF may be used in near futur e for humans in the treatment 
of this disease.
2. Epilepsy : It is one of the convulsive disorders of nerves which are charac terized by abrupt 
transient symptoms of motor, sensory, psychic or autonomic nature, f requently associated with 
changes in consciousness. These changes are believed to be secondar y to sudden transient 
alterations in brain function associated with excessive rapid elec tric discharges in the gray matter. 
The onset of epilepsy is usually before age 30. Later age onset sug gests organic disease. In some 
patients, emotional disturbances play a signiicant “trigger” rol e. Electroencephalography is the 
most important test in the study of epilepsy. Anticonvulsant drugs ar e used. Alcohol aggravates 
epilepsy, so persons sufering from epilepsy should avoid alcohol.3117. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
3. Alzheimer’s disease:  Alzheimer’s disease was irst described by Alois Alzheimer in 1907. It 
is characterized by the decline in brain function. Its symptoms  are similar to those diseases that 
cause dementia (memory loss). There is a genetic predisposition to th e disease in some people, so 
it tends to run in families. There is also evidence that high levels  of aluminium may contribute to 
the onset of this disease. There is also decline in brain function with age.
Efect of Drugs on Coordination
Action of Nicotine:  Nicotine afects post synaptic membrane in CNS and PNS. It mimi cs the 
action of acetylcholine on nicotine receptors, so it is stimulant of nerve impulse. It increases the 
heart beat rate, blood pressure and digestive tract mobility. Nicotine m ay induce vomiting and 
diarrhoea and even may cause water retention relation by kidneys.
CHEMICAL COORDINATION
In animals, it involves endocrine system which comprises endocrin e glands in various parts of the 
body, which secrete hormones. The endocrine or ductless glands are,  with a few exceptions, discrete 
groups of cells, which make speciic chemical compounds call ed hormones (Greek hormone is 
exciting, setting in motion). Endocrine system consists of some 20 en docrine glands/tissues lying in 
diferent parts of the body.3217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Hormones
Hormones are organic compounds of varying 
structural complexity (see below). They are 
poured directly and are transported to blood to 
respective target tissues. The hormones afect the 
target cells. They do not initiate new biochemical 
reactions but produce their efects by regulating 
enzymatic and other chemical reactions, already 
present. They may either stimulate or inhibit a 
function. Hormones may also control some long 
term changes, such as rate of growth, rate of 
metabolic activity and sexual maturity. 
Chemically hormones may be of following four 
types:
(i) Proteins (e.g. insulin and glucagon .) (ii) Amino 
acids & derivatives (e.g. Thyroxine, epinephrine 
and norepinephrine) (iii) Polypeptides (e.g. 
vasopressin or anti-diuretic hormone and 
oxytocin), and (iv) Steroids (e.g. oestrogens, 
testosterone and cortisone.)
ENDOCRINE GLANDS OF 
MAMMALS 
Hypothalamus
It is a part of the forebrain. It is here that many 
of the sensory stimuli of nervous system are 
converted into hormonal responses. It is believed 
that oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) 
are produced in hypothalamus and travel down 
the nerves to the posterior lobe of pituitary to be 
stored. They are released from their storage after 
receiving nerve impulses from the hypothalamus.
(Fig 17.13)
17.13 The Hypothalamus - Pituitary Connection.
Neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus
produce and secrete a variety of hormones.
One of the nerve clusters synthesizes oxytocin 
and vasopressin, then stores them in nerve 
endings located in the posterior pituitary. 
Upon proper stimulation from the brain, 
oxytocin and vasopressin are released into 
the blood supply of the posterior pituitary. 
Other nerve clusters in the hypothalamus 
produce and secrete a battery of releasing 
and inhibiting hormones, which are carried 
by the blood to the anterior pituitary. There, 
they regulate the secretion of various tropic 
hormones, growth hormone, and prolactin 
manufactu red by the anterior pituitary cells.3317. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
The Pituitary Gland
In man, the pituitary gland or hypophysis cerebri is an ovoid structure about 0.5 gm in the adult 
and is connected to brain through a short stalk (the infundibulu m). It has three lobes viz, anterior, 
median and posterior. The anterior lobe is often referred to as the ma ster gland, because in addition 
to producing primary hormones it produces the tropic hormones whic h control the secretion of 
homones in many of the other endocrine glands (Fig. 17.13).
Anterior lobe:  Anterior lobe of pituitary secretes the following hormones:
1. Somatotrophin hormone (STH) :  Somatotrophin releasing factor (SRF) is secreted from 
hypothalamus throughout the life. When growth has mostly ceased a fter adolescence, the hormone 
continues to promote protein synthesis throughout the body. If produced i n excess during early 
life, leads to gigantism or if later in life causes the abnorma l development of hands, feet, jaws, etc. 
(known as acromegaly). If there is undersecretion, dwarism resu lts, as well as other symptoms 
associated with lack of thyroid and adrenal hormone.
2. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) : Release of thyrotroph in releasing factor from the 
hypothalamus is controlled by the levels of nuyoxine in the blood. I n the presence of low levels of 
thyroxine, there is increasing production of TSH and vice versa (F ig 17.16). It is secreted throughout 
life but particularly reaches high levels during the periods of rapid growth and development. It acts 
directly on the cells of the thyroid gland, increasing both their n umbers and their secretory activity 
(Fig. 17.15).
3. Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) (Corticotrop hic hormone):  Release of 
corticotrophin releasing factor from the hypothalamus is controlled by steroid levels in the blood 
and by direct nervous stimulation of the hypothalamus as a result of stress e.g. cold, heat, pain, 
fright, infections. Excess and deiciency results ui disturban ce of normal adrenal functions.
4. Gonadotrophic hormones (GH) :  These are follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinising 
hormone (LH also called interstitial cell stimulating hormone ICSH , in the male), prolactin (sometimes 
inappropriately called luteotrophic hormone, LTH). 
FSH and LH/1CSH share a common hypothalamic releasing fa ctor. Prolactin is continuously produced 
from the pituitary and is inhibited by prolactin inhibiting f actor (PIH) from the hypothalamus. Prolactin 
stimulates milk production and acts with LH as described below . FSH in females stimulates follicle 
development and secretion of oestrogens from the ovaries; in males it stimul ates development 
of the germinal epithelium of the testis and sperm production. LH wor ks with FSH to stimulate 
oestrogen secretion and rupture of mature follicles to release egg or ovum. It also causes the 
lutenisation (lit. “turning yellow’) of the latter and acts synergi stically with prolactin to maintain the 
corpus luteum (and hence the progesterone it secretes). ICSH in the ma le stimulates the interstitial 
cells of the testis to secrete testosterone.3417. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Median lobe :  Median lobe secretes the following hormone :
Melanophore stimulating hormone (MSH) :  Its inhibition of secretion is controlled by 
hypothalamus. External light governs its secretion. More secretion in pregnancy stimulates 
melanocytes in skin to produce brown pigment, melanin, which da rkens the skin. Excess MSH is 
secreted in Addison’s disease. One of the symptoms of which is d arkening of the skin.
Posterior lobe: Posterior lobe of the pituitary gland secretes the following hormones:
1. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or Vasopressin:  Its secretion iscaused by decrease in blood 
pressure, blood volume, and osmotic pressure of the blood which is detected by osmoreceptors in 
hypothalamus. External’ sensory stimuli also inluence hypothala mic neurosecretory cells. Increased 
levels cause increased water reabsorption in distal parts of nephr on. A lack of this hormone produce 
diabetes insipidus, characterized by production of large quanti ties o f dilute urine and great thirst.
2. Oxytocin :  Its release is stimulated by distension of cervix, decrease in prog esterone level in 
blood, and neural stimuli during parturition and suckling.  Primary action is on smooth muscle, 
particularly in the uterus during childbirth, and also cau ses milk ejection from mammary glands.
Thyroid gland
In mammals it consists of two lobes situated below the larynx (Fig . 17.15). It produces thyroxine 
(or tetraiodo-thyonine: T4), tri-iodothyronine or T3 (which has a structure similar to thyroxine 
with 3 iodine atoms rather than 4) and calcitonin hormone. The th yroid is active continuously but 
produces higher levels of secretions during periods of rapid gr owth and sexual maturation and in 
stress situations such as cold and hunger.3517. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine, the two hormones act in essentially the same way. They act on the 
basal metabolic rate by stimulating the breakdown of glucose and release of heat and generation 
of ATP. They also act in conjunction with somatotropin in bringi ng about growth, and act directly 
on brain cells causing them to diferentiate. In amphibians, they  bring about the process of 
metamorphosis. If secretion of thyroid is deicient,, tadpole larva of frog does not metamorphose 
to develop into frog, but instead grow to a large sized tadpole.
Excess thyroxine produces a condition called Graves’ disease, with  exophthalmic goiter and increase 
in the basal metabolic rate. This can lead to cardiac failur e if prolonged. The cause of Graves’ 
disease is the production of an abnormal body protein which contin uously stimulates the thyroid 
to excessive secretion.
If congenitally deicient, the lack of thyroxine causes cretinism, where the individual fails to develop 
normally. They are small, have coarse scanty hair, thick yell owish scaly skin and are mentally 
retarded. They also fail to develop sexually. Deiciency later in lif e, perhaps due to iodine shortage 
in diet, produces swelling of the neck (goiter) and may lead to d eposition of excess fat as a result 
of which’weight is increased. The condition is known as myxoed ema, and it is characterized by 
puiness of hands and skin.
All bodily and mental processes are retarded. High Ca+ ion concentration in the blood causes 
stimulation of the synthesis and release of calcitonin; low levels of Ca++ ions suppress its manufacture. 
Excess or deiciency leads to disturbance of calcium metabolism w ith its associated efects on nerve, 
skeleton, muscle, blood etc. Calcitonin is antogonistic to parathormone hormone.
Table salt with iodine is recommended so that there is no deiciency of  iodine and thus of 
thyroxine in the body.3617. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
17.15 The thyroid and parathyroid glands
(a) The thyroid and parathyroid glands are Iocatevl Mow the Uiryn x in the neck’,
(b) Individuals with iodine-deicient diets may have goiter, a cond ition in which the thyroid
    becomes greatly enlarged.3717. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Parathyroids
In man the glands are found embedded in the posterior part of the l ateral lobes of the thyroid. These 
produce a hormone called parathormone. Low levels of blood Ca++ ions stimulate the parathyroid 
directly to increase parathormone production whereas high  evels of Ca++ ions suppress its release. 
Under-activity causes a drop in blood Ca++ ions which in turn leads to muscular tetany. Over-activity 
would lead to a progressive demineralization of the bones similar to rickets, as well as to the 
formation of massive kidney stones. Both conditions may be fatal.
Islets of Langerhans (Pancreas)
This is under control of the pituitary trophic hormones STH and ACTH and also responds directly 
to the level of blood glucose. The islets contain large number of p c ells associated with insulin 
production. The smaller number of a cells secrete glucagon. In g eneral, insulin depresses blood 
glucose levels, in a variety of ways which include increasing  glycogen synthesis and increasing cell 
utilization of glucose. It also stimulates conversion of glucose into lipid and protein, which in turn 
reduce glucose levels.
Insulin inhibits the hydrolysis of glycogen in the liver and the muscles. Failure to produce insulin 
leads to a condition called diabetes mellitus . The symptoms of this are high level of blood sugar, 
sugar in the urine, a disturbance of the body’s osmotic equilibr ium and derangement of the 
nervous system. Toxic metabolites from fat (which need ‘glucose energy ’ for their oxidation) also 
accumulate and are only lost from the kidney with valuable metal cations. The body becomes 
dehydrated. If excess insulin is produced the utilization of s ugar is too great and its level falls in the 
blood (hypoglycaemia) which upsets nerve and muscle functionin g.3817. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Glucagon is essentially antagonistic to insulin and causes an  increase in blood glucose level s. It 
does this mainly by promoting breakdown of glycogen to glucose in  the liver and muscles. It also 
increases the rate of breakdown of fats. 
Glucagon abnormalities seem rare as endocrine disorders. Tum ors on the a cells will cause excess 
glucagon secretions and consequently high blood glucose levels. Thi s in turn damages the a cells 
with the results described above.
Adrenals
A pair of adrenal gland is present, one on top of each kidney. I ts outer layer in called adrenal 
cortex and inner is adrenal medulla. The medulla produces the h ormones adrenaline (epinephrine) 
and noradrenaline (norepinephrine) The adrenal cortex secretes cor tico-steroids such as cortisol, 
corticosterone, aldosterone, and androgenic hormones. (Fig. 17.16)
17.16 The adrenal gland3917. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Adrenaline and noradrenaline hormones:  Both adrenaline and noradrenaline are secreted 
in stress situations. Essentially adrenaline dilates blood vessels in certain parts of the body such 
as the skeletal muscles and increases the heart’s output. Noradrenal ine constricts blood vessels 
but again only in certain areas, such as the gut, so the efects of  the two hormones are synergistic 
in raising blood pressure. Adrenaline and noradrenaline prom ote the release of glucose from 
liver glycogen and reinforce the efects of the sympathetic system. Rarel y found, but in excess, 
these hormones lead to abnormally high blood pressures. In rats w hose adrenal medulla has 
been removed surgically, the ability to withstand any stress situ ation - such as cold - is markedly 
diminished. 
Cortical hormones:  The adrenal cortex is active at all times but especially so follow ing shock 
or stress situations and infections. Cortisol is the glucocorticoid, and brings about an increase in 
blood glucose level mainly by its production fronr protein and b y antagonizing the action of insulin.
Corticosterone is both a glucocorticoid and a mineralocorticoid; it in creases blood glucose levels 
and regulates mineral ion balance. Aldosterone is the princip al mineralo-corticoid and conserves 
the level of Na+ ions in the body by preventing their loss from the kid ney tubules.
 
The destruction of the adrenal cortex, such as occurs in Addison’ s disease, will lead to general 
metabolic disturbance, in particular weakness of muscle acti on and loss of salts. Stress situations, 
such as cold, which would normally be overcome, lead to collapse and death. The reverse of 
this is found in Cushing’s disease where too much cortical hor mone is produced. Symptoms are 
an excessive protein breakdown resulting muscular and bone wea kness. The high blood sugar 
disturbs the metabolism as in diabetes. Androgens cause development of the secondary male 
characteristics. Very small amounts of androgens are secreted in both male and female by adrenal 
glands. A tumor on the inner part of the adrenal cortex in a fema le can cause excess of androgens 
to be produced and thus the development of certain male characteristics . Such cases are very rare.
Gut
Many parts of the gut function as endocrine tissue. The important h ormones produced are:4017. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
1. Gastrin:  Gastrin is the hormone produced by mucosa of the pyloric region of  the stomach. It 
stimulates the secretion of gastric juice. It is produced under the i nluence of protein food in the 
stomach after it is partially digested.
2. Secretin:  It is produced from the duodenum when acid food touches its lining . It afects the 
pancreas to produce and release pancreatic juice and also afects the rate of bile production in the 
liver. 
Gonads
(a) Ovary
1. Oestrogen :  Oestrogen is secreted by ripening follicles (and, in many s pecies, by interstitial 
cells of the ovary) whose development has been initiated by FSH from the pituitary. Oestrogens 
bring about the development of the secondary sexual characters in the female, cause thickening 
of the uterine wall and, at a point during the oestrous or menstrua l cycle, exert a positive feedback 
which results in a sharp rise in LH output by the pituitary. They also aid in healing and repair of 
uterine wall after menstruation. Under the inluence of oestrogen, some of th e cells of uterine wall 
become glandular and start secreting proteinaceous secretions which are taken up by the embryo 
during its early stages of development. Deiciency of the sex hormones, f or one reason or another, 
leads
in the young of failure to mature sexually and sterility in the a dult.
2. Progesterone : Produced by the ruptured follicle in response to LH from the pituita ry. 
Progesterone inhibits further FSH secretion from the pituitary, thus  preventing any more follicles 
from ripening. It also afects the uterus, causing further thicken ing and vascularization of its wall, and 
other areas of the female body, preparing it for maintaining the sta te of pregnancy. It suppresses 
ovulation. That is why it is a major constituent of birth control pi ll.4117. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
(b) Testes
The testes consist of many coiled seminiferous tubules where the sperma tozoa develop and, 
between the tubules, regions of interstitial cells produce gonadal horm ones called testosterone 
and 17 b-hydroxytestosterone.
After the initiation of development, the sex organs in the foetus produce th em, and their level 
rises fairly consistently until puberty. After puberty the suppl y of LH (ICSH), and therefore, the level 
of testosterone, remains constant. In the foetus, it initiates the developmen t of the sex organs. 
At puberty it brings about development of the male secondary characteri stics and promotes the 
sex drive. The castrated male fails to develop secondary sexual char acteristics and his body tends 
more towards the form of the immature female.
Feedback Mechanism
It is a type of interaction in which a controlling mechanism is  itself controlled by the products of 
reactions it is controlling. 
For proper body functions, two opposing systems are needed, if there a re accelerators, there must 
be inhibitors. If one hormone in the body promotes or stimulates a rea ction, another hormone would 
be checking the same. In the body, interaction is mainly main tained due to feedback mechanism. 
In this way, concentration of secretions is itself controlled becau se certain information is passed to 
the source or in other words is fed back so that the output of the sec retion is adjusted accordingly, 
depending on the activity of the body. The interaction between the. pituita ry and other endocrine
glands, over which it exerts control, is an example of feedback mechanism and this mechanism is 
very common in living systems. Feedback in thyroid gland functi on is described. (Steps correspond 
to the ig. 17.17).4217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 17.17 Negative feedback in thyroid gland function4317. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
 
1. Low body temperature or stress stimulates neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus, whose 
releasing hormones trigger the release of 2.Thyroid-stimulating horm one (TSH) in the anterior 
pituitary. 3. The TSH then stimulates the thyroid gland to release th yroxine. 4. Thyroxine causes an 
increase in the metabolic activity of most body cells, generating ATP  energy and heat. 5. Both raised 
the body temperature and higher thyroxine levels in the blood inhibit the releasing-hormone cells 
and the TSH-producing cells.
Comparison of Nervous Coordination 
and Chemical Coordination
Similarities:
1. Both hormone producing cells and nerve cells (neurons) synthesi ze chemical “messenger”.
2. Both release the messenger chemicals in extra cellular spaces of the body.
3. Both help in co-ordination of the body.
4. Both function in response to speciic stimuli either from within the body or from
the external environment.
5. Both are homeostatic in function.4417. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Diferences:
Nervous Coordination Chemical Coordination
1. Neurons (sensory, associative and motor), 
are the basic units of structure and function. In 
addition neuroglial cells are also present, which 
provide nutrition and protection to neurons.1. Hormone producing cells and neuro secretory 
cells (such as those found in the hypothalamus), 
release hormones and are units of structure 
and function.
2. Chemicals produced by neuron endings act 
where they are produced i.e. very close to the 
cells they inluence, commonly from less than 
a micrometer away For example, acetylcholine 
produced by nerve endings at synapse, excites 
the next neuron.2. Chemicals produced (the hormones or neuro 
hormone) are poured into and are transported 
by blood. These hormones afect the target cells, 
which are far away from where the hormones 
are produced. ADH is produced from posterior 
lobe of pituitary giand; but afects the target cells 
present in the nephron and collecting tubule of 
kidney, to control re-absorption of water.
3. in this system the neurons release its 
neurotransmitter into one or a small group of 
speciic cells.3. The blood borne hormones bathe millions of 
cells indiscriminately and only a few respond to 
these hormones.
4 This has immediate efect or show response 
to a stimulus instantly.4. There may have immediate efects (e.g. 
insulin), but mostly hormones have prolonged 
or delayed  efects for example growth hormone.
5. This control is afected through the electrical 
signals that travel within the cell itself and it 
releases its neuro transmitters only where it 
reaches its target5. This control involves only chemical stimulation 
and the target cells are far away from them:
6, This shows faster or rapid efect. The speed 
of impulse in most cases is 100 meters/second; 
but maximum speed of nerve impulse recorded 
in the human beings is 120 meters/second.6. it is not very rapid; but shows slow but 
prolonged efects.
7. The chemicals involved in this system (the 
neurotransmitters or neuro hormones) are 
short lived i.e. broken down shortly after .heir 
release. Thus the efects of messengers sent by 
neurons tend to be of much shorter duration.7. The hormones are the chemicals, which 
remain active for much longer duration within 
the blood; and thus have much longer duration 
for their actions.4517. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
BEHAVIOUR
Behaviour is divided into two main types, innate behaviour and lear ned behaviour.
Innate Behaviour
It is a collection of responses that are predetermined by the inheritanc e of speciic nerve or 
cytoplasmic pathways in multicellular or unicellular (acell ular) organisms. As a result of the built 
in pathways,a given stimulus would produce invariably the sam e response. All plant behaviour is 
innate. 
These behaviour patterns have been developed and been reined over many genera tions (selected) 
and their primary adaptive signiicance lies in their survival value to the species.
Another feature is the economy it places on nerve pathways within mu lticellular organisms since it 
does not demand on the higher centre of the nervous system.
Types of innate behaviour:
1. Orientation
(i) Kineses: It is a behaviour in which an organism changes the speed of random movements 
which help them to survive in the environment e.g. this type of behaviou r enables pilibugs to reach 
the moist area which is required for their life.
(ii) Taxes:  In contrast to kineses a taxis (plural: taxes) is a directed m ovement either towards 
(positive taxis ) or away from (negative taxis) a stimulus.
2. Relexes and instincts
These are extremely complex behaviours and include biological rhy thms, territorial behaviour, 
courtship, mating, aggression, altruism, social hierarchies and social, organizations.4617. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Instincts & Learning
Darwin (1859) was the irst to propose an objective deinition of instin cts in terms of animal 
behaviour. He treated instincts as complex relexes made up of units c ompatible with the 
mechanisms of inheritance, and thus a product of natural selec tion, that had evolved together with 
the other aspects of life. Thus instinctive behaviour is a part of  one’s inherited structure by which 
the individual responses to a particular stimulus. This respons e is similar in members of a species. 
All animals inherit certain responses which equip them to live h aving abilities like walking, moving 
running and eating etc.
The early ethologists (Uexkull 1934, Lorenz 1935) thought that anim als sometimes respond 
instinctively to speciic though often complex stimuli. Such stimuli  came to be called “sign stimuli”. 
A sign stimulus is a part of stimulus coniguration and may  be relatively simple part. For example a 
male three-spined stickle back ish has a characteristic red bel ly when in breeding condition. This is 
a ‘sign stimulus’ that elicits aggression in other territorial m ales.
Instincts equip an animal with speciic response to a particula r stimulus, thus enabling it to adapt to 
its environment. Learning on the other hand, depends on the experiences in one’s own life but for 
this to occur, depends upon the development and evolution of the nervous sy stem of that animal. 
So the higher animals have higher level of learning. Lower anima ls because of poorly developed 
systems to responds to a particular stimulus learn very slowly, and even in some cases do not 
have the ability to modify or change their instinctive behaviour. The selective responses to stimuli 
suggested that there must be some built-in mechanism by which si gn stimuli were recognized. This 
mechanism came to be called the innate releasing mechanism (IRM) . The important aspect of this 
concept is that the mechanism is envisaged as being innate, that is , both the recognition of the sign 
stimulus and the resulting response to it are inborn and chara cteristic of the species.
Instinct can equip an animal with series of responses. This is important for animals with short life 
spans and with little or no parental care. For example, a femal e digger wasp ( Ammophila adriaansei ) 
prepares a nest, catches caterpillars, kills them by sting, p uts them in nest, lays eggs on them and 
then closes the nest. After doing all this, she dies. The larvae a fter emerging from the eggs, start 
feeding on caterpillars killed by their mother before death and g row to digger wasps. All this is 
completed within few weeks and is done by instincts of digger was p, which may be responding to 
perception of a caterpillar (the possible sign stimulus) in dif erent ways.4717. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Instinctive behaviour Learning behaviou r
• This is the type of behaviour that depends 
on the heredity material which the animal 
inherits. The animal may be born with the 
right responses built in the nervous system 
as part of its inherited structure.• This type of behaviour depends on the 
environmental inluence, but the ability 
to modify the behaviour depends on the 
heredity material.
• Experience has no obvious inluence on this 
type of behaviour.• Experience has an obvious inluence on this 
type of behaviour.
• This type of behaviour depends on the 
selection operating during the history of 
species, so that it helps in the adaptability of 
the organism in the environment.• This type of behaviour depends on the 
selection operating during the history of the 
individual (during one’s life-time) so as to help 
the organism in its adaptability in the given 
environment.
• Instinct can equip an animal with a series of 
responses. This is advantageous for animals 
with short life spans, and with little or no 
parental care.• Learning can equip an animal with a set of 
adaptive responses to its environment. This 
is advantageous for those animals -which 
have long life spans and have parental care, 
so that they can modify the behaviour by 
previous experiences.
• This type of behaviour evolves slowly in the 
species.• This type of behaviour evolves during the 
life cycle of the individual but the ability of 
learning depends on the genetic basis of the 
individual.
For example:
(i) Honey bees inherit the ability to form wing 
muscles and wings for light. They inherit the 
tendency to ly towards lowers to seek nectar 
and pollen.
(ii) Behaviour of digger wasp is instinctive; but 
it does learn certain things during its brief life, 
such as locality of each of its nests, where it has 
to return after hunting.For example:
(i) Conditioned relex type I, in case of dogs 
where dogs learn to salivate on ringing of bell 
alone. 
(ii) Trial and error learning in case of cat, when 
it learns to press, the lever to open the door of 
the cage. 
(iii) Crawling snail on a sheet of glass, learns that 
tapping has no harmful efect and ceases to 
respond after few early responses.4817. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Learning Behaviour (Modiication through experience)
Thorpe deined learning as that process which manifests itself by  adaptive changes in individual 
behaviour as a result of experience. 
Thorpe classiied learning behaviour into six types:
(1) Imprinting
(2) Habituation
(3) Conditioning or conditioned relex type i.
(4) Operent conditioning or conditioned relex type ii.
(5) Latent learning
(6) Insight learning.
1. Imprinting :  Imprinting is a form of learning which is best known in b irds such as geese, ducks, 
and chickens, which are all precocial birds. Shortly after hatching, ducklings and other young birds 
have a tendency to follow moving objects in their surroundings. They  show a brief sensitive period 
during which the shape of form of objects can be ‘imprinted’, w ith the result that the young birds 
will follow them. Normally, of course, the irst moving object encounter ed is the mother bird, and 
it is obviously adaptive for the young birds to learn her appeara nce and to follow her. However, 
if its parents are absent, a young bird may imprint on other sp ecies of birds, human beings, or 
inanimate objects.
2. Habituation : Habituation is the simplest form of learning and involves modiicati on of 
behaviour through a diminution of response to repeated stimuli. A los s of receptivity to repetitious 
stimuli can be useful in preventing a drain of energy and attenti on for trivial purposes. For examples:
(i) A snail crawling on a sheet of glass retracts into its sh ell when glass is tapped. After a pause, it 
emerges and continues moving. A second tap causes retraction again  but it emerges more quickly. 
Ultimately, tapping has no efect and snail ceases to respond.4917. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
(ii) Rodents respond to alarm calls by others in their group, i f these calls are continued and no 
danger is conirmed, further calls may be ignored.
3. Conditioning or conditioned relex type I: Conditioning or conditioned relex type I 
involves the pairing of an irrelevant stimulus with a natural pr imary stimulus that elicifs an automatic 
response.
Pavlov conditioned the dogs to secrete saliva on ringing of the bell, whi ch is not normal stimulus 
for secretion of saliva. In his experiments, he would ring the bel l just before giving food to the dogs, 
so the dogs became conditioned to secondary stimulus or conditioned sti mulus (ringing of bell) 
and started secreting saliva in response to it as if it were the natu ral stimulus. This type of learning 
broadens the ability of an organism to react appropriately to environ mental changes, since the 
conditioning process removes dependence on one kind of relex symbol for action.
4. Operent conditioning or conditioned relex type II: Operent conditioning or 
conditioned relex type II (also called trial and error learning) is a more complex type of learning 
than habituation. This type of learning has been demonstrated and studied by Thorndike and B.F. 
Skinner, a Harvard psychologist. Under natural conditions, the a chievement of a particular goal is 
the reward that directs random activities into a behavioural pattern. Trial and error repetitions, 
step by step, lead to inal achievement. Experiments on rats and cats were performed to run a 
maze to either get or ind food, or to depress a lever and come out of the cag e. In this case irst 
experience is accidental and then it is rewarded, animal learn s with latter experience.
5. Latent learning:  Thorpe deined latent learning as the association of indiferent stimul i or 
situations without patent reward. 
Suppose we put a rat in a maze as it wanders about and acci dentally gets food. Did he learn anything 
before getting the food in the irst experience? If we put the rat in the sa me maze again, it may 
directly reach the food. That means when the rat was wandering,  it did learn something without 
even the incentive of any reward.5017. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
6. Insight learning:  Kohler performed many experiments on chimpanzees, and showed that 
they have higher form of learning called insight learning. In sight learning is an extreme case of 
behavioural modiication involving the application of insight or reas oning to a novel situation. If 
an animal can direct its behaviour to solve a problem for which i t has no previous experience then 
reasoning is involved. Reasoning in humans appears to involve a rec asting of an external situation 
in the imagination and a manipulation of the concepts to produce a solution that can be applied 
to situations. However, such insight or reason may be found in other primates. This is the highest 
form of learning. For example: A chimpanzee is placed in a cage in which a choice piece fruit hangs 
from the ceiling. This chimpanzee cannot reach the fruit, but th e keeper has placed some boxes 
of diferent sizes in the cage. After a short period of head scratchi ng, the chimpanzee moves the 
largest box and piles other smaller boxes over it, and climbs up to reach the fruits.5117. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Exercise
Q.1 .Fill in the blanks
(i) Neurotransmitter molecules bind to the receptors on the ___________ __ membrane at synapse.
(ii) Excess of ___________________  hormone is secreted in A ddison’s disease.
(iii) Operent learning has been demonstrated and studied by ____ _______ and _________________.
(iv) ____________________ are plant hormones which delay th e life of fresh leaf crops.
(v) All membranes of neurons have very active_________and ______ __pumps.
Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and w rite the correct statement and 
pumps.
(i) Impulses travel much more rapidly along myelinated neurons .
(ii) All glial tissue consist of glial cells.
(iii) Saltatory conduction is carried out by those nerve ibres that h ave nodes of Ranvier.
(iv) The myelin sheath of neuron is particularly good conductor of  electric impulse.
(v) The resting membrane potential is maintained largely by the s odium pump.
(vi) Hormones initiate new biochemical reactions in the body.
Q.4. Short questions
(i) Deine cir-cadian rhythm.
(ii) What is the diference between CNS and PNS?
(iii) What are the functions of parathyroid gland?
(iv) Deine the term hormone.
(v) What are the commercial applications of auxins?
(vi) List diferent types of tropisms.
(vii) Write a note on Alzheimer’s disease.5217. Coordination and Control eLearn.Punjab
Q.5. Extensive questions.
(i) Describe diferent types of learning behaviour. 
(ii) Describe in detail the role of adrenal glands. 
(iii) Deine nerve impulse. Explain the mechanism involved by label led diagrams.
(iv) How is the nervous system of Planaria better developed than that of Hydra ?
(v) Describe the structure and functions of the diferent parts of huma n brain.
(vi) Writea note on pituitary gland.