CHAPTER
21 Cell Cycle
Animation 21 : Cell cycle
Source & Credit: Wikispaces221. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
INTRODUCTION
     
  The cell undergoes a sequence of changes, which involves  period of growth, replication 
of DNA, followed by cell division. This sequence of change s is called cell cycle.
       It comprises two phases viz., interphase which is the period of non-apparent 
division and the period of division also known as mitotic phase . Each phase is further 
subdivided into diferent sub-phases.
INTERPHASE
         The period of life cycle of cell (cell cycle) between tw o consecutive divisions is 
termed as the interphase or misleadingly called resting phase. It is the period of great 
biochemical activity and can further be divided into G1-phase, S-phase and G2-phase.
 G1 (Gap 1) is the period of extensive metabolic activity, in whi ch cell normally grows 
in size, speciic enzymes, are synthesized and DNA bas e units are accumulated for the 
DNA synthesis. Post-mitotic cell can exit the cell cycle dur ing G1 entering a phase called 
G0, and remain for days, weeks, or in some cases (e.g., nerve cells and cells of the eye 
lens) even the life time of the organism without proliferating  further. Following the G1 is 
the S-phase (synthesis phase) during which the DNA is s ynthesized and (chromosome 
are replicated)  which initiates G2 phase (pre-mitotic phase), thus preparing the cell for 
division e.g., energy storage for chromosome movements, mitosis speciic proteins, 
RNA and microtubule subunits (for spindle ibers) synthes ize. Cells then proceed to 
next phase which is the period of division). At each stage,  there are speciic check 
points, which determine the fate of new phase according to c ell’s internal make up. 
Length of each phase is variable. In the case of human c ell, average cell cycle is about 
24 hours, mitosis takes 30 minutes, G1 9 hours, the S-phase 10 hours, and G2 4.5 hours 
whereas full cycle in yeast cells is only 90 minutes.321. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
    
Fig. 21.1 The fate of a single parental chromosome throughout the  eukaryotic cell cycle.421. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
MITOSIS
  
 It is the type of cell division, which ensures the same n umber of chromosomes in the 
daughter cells as that in the parent cells. In spite of sl ight diferences, major steps of 
mitosis are similar in plants as well as in animals. H owever, to avoid the confusion 
our statement will base on the animal cell. It can take pla ce in haploid as well as in 
diploid cells in nearly all parts of the body if and whe n required.
     Mitosis is a continuous process, but conventionally it may  be divided into two 
phases, i.e., karyokinesis, which involves the division of nucleus and cytokinesis that 
refers to the division of the whole cell (Fig.21.2).
Fig 21.2 The stages of mitosis and cytokinesis in an anim al cell.521. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Karyo kinesis
At the beginning of the process in an animal cell, the pa rtition of the centriole takes place, 
which have been duplicated during interphase but presen t in the same centrosome. 
Early in the mitosis the two pair of centrioles separate and migrate to opposite sides 
of the nucleus, establishing the bipolarity of the dividing cells.
Three sets of microtubules (ibers) originate from each pai r of centrioles. One set the 
astral microtubules, radiate outward and form aster, other two sets of microtubules 
compose the spindle. The kinetochore microtubules attach to chr omosomes at 
kinetochores and polar microtubules do not interact the chromosome s but instead 
interdigitate with polar microtubules from the opposite pole. Th ese microtubules are 
composed of a protein tubulin and traces of RNA.
This specialized microtubule structure including aster a nd spindle is called mitotic 
apparatus. This is larger than the nucleus, and is des igned to attach and capture 
chromosomes, aligning them and inally separating them so th at equal distribution of 
chromosomes is ensured.
Karyokinesis can further be divided into prophase, metapha se, anaphase and telophase 
for thorough understanding, though it is a continuous process.
Prophase
During interphase (non-dividing phase) of the cell cycle the chromosomes are not 
visible even with electron microscope, but using histologic sta ins for DNA, a network621. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
of very ine threads can be visualized. This network is ca lled as chromatin.
The chromatin material gets condensed by folding and the c hromosomes appear as 
thin threads (0.25 mm - 50 mm in length) at the beginning of prophase. 
Chromosomes become more and more thick ultimately each chromos ome is visible 
having two sister chromatids, attached at centromere. Towards th e end of prophase, 
nuclear envelope disappears and nuclear material is re leased in the cytoplasm, nucleoli 
disappear. Mitotic apparatus is organized (as described above). Cytoplasm becomes 
more viscous.
Metaphase
     Each metaphase chromosome is a duplicated structure w hich consists of two 
sister chromatids, attached at a point called centromere or pr imary constriction. The 
centromere has special area, the kinetochore, with speciic  base arrangement and 
special proteins where kinetochore ibers of mitotic apparatus  attach.
The kinetochore ibers of spindle attach to the kinetochore regi on (specialized area 
in centromere) of chromosome, and align them at the equator of the spindle forming 
equatorial plate or metaphase plate. Each kinetochore gets two ibers one from each 
pole.
Anaphase
       It is the most critical phase of the mitosis, which e nsures equal distribution of 
chromatids in the daughter cells. The kinetochore ibers of spindle contract towards 
their respective poles, at the same time polar microtubules e longates exert force and 
sister chromatids are separated from centromere. As a resu lt, half sister chromatids 
travel towards each pole. 
Telophase
      Reaching of the chromosomes at opposite poles terminates anaphase and start 
telophase. The chromosomes decondense due to unfolding, ultim ately disappear as 
chromatin. Mitotic apparatus disorganizes nuclear membrane  and nucleoli reorganize, 
resulting two nuclei at two poles of the cell.
Cytokinesis
     During late telophase the astral microtubules send sig nals to the equatorial region 
of the cell, where actin and myosin are activated which for m contractile ring, followed 
by cleavage furrow, which deepens towards the center of the  cell, dividing the parent 
cell into two daughter cells.721. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
      Mitotic events in plant cells are generally similar  to the events observed in animal 
cells but there are some major diferences. Most higher pl ants lack visible centrioles, 
instead they have its analogous region from which the spindl e microtubules radiate. 
Moreover, shape of the plant cell does not change greatly comp ared with an animal 
cell- because it is surrounded by a rigid cell wall. At cytokinesis, in place of contractile 
ring a membrane structure, phragmoplast is formed from ves icle which originate from 
Golgi complex. These vesicles originate actually during me taphase, line up in the center 
of the dividing cell, where they fuse to form phragmoplast a t the end of telophase. 
The membrane of vesicles becomes the plasma membrane of daughter cells. These 
vesicles also contain materials for future cell wall such as precursors of cellulose and 
pectin (Fig.21.3).
Fig 21.3 Mitosis in a higher plant cell821. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Importance of mitosis
        In mitosis the hereditary material is equally di stributed in the daughter cell. As 
there is no crossing over or recombination, the genetic informa tion remains unchanged 
generation after generation, thus continuity of similar inform ation is ensured from 
parent to daughter cell. Some organisms, both plants and an imals, undergo asexual 
reproduction. Regeneration, healing of wounds and replacem ent of older cells all are 
the gifts of mitosis. Development and growth of multicellular org anisms depends upon 
orderly, controlled mitosis. Tissue culture and cloning see k help through mitosis. For 
all this an organism requires managed, controlled and pr operly organized process of 
mitosis, which otherwise may result malfunction, unwanted tu mors and lethal diseases 
like cancer.
Cancer (uncontrolled cell division)
          The multiplication of cells is so carefully re gulated and responsive to speciic 
needs of the body, that process of cell death and birth are balanced to produce a steady 
state. Sometime the control, that regulates the cell multiplicati on, breaks down. A cell 
in which this occurs, begins to grow and divide in unregu lated fashion without body’s 
need for further cells of its type. When such cells produ ce new cells which continue to 
proliferate in incontrolled fashion, an unwanted clone of ce lls, called tumor is formed, 
which can expand indeinitely. Tumors arise frequently,  especially in older animals and 
humans, and are of two basic types. Some tumors are of smal l size and localized (not 
transferred to other parts) called benign. The cells in th is type usually behave like the 
normal cells and have little deleterious efects,, only due to either its interference with 
normal cells or its hormone-like secretions.921. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
                   
Fig: 21.4 result of meiosis,four haploid cells, each 
with half as many chromosomes as the original cells.1021. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
 In contrast, the cells composing a malignant tumor or cancer , divide more rapidly, 
mostly invade surrounding tissues, get into the body’s circul atory system, and set up 
areas of proliferation, away from their site of original app earance. This spread of: tumor 
cells and establishment of secondary areas of growth is ca lled as metastasis.
Cancer cells can be distinguished from normal cells be cause they are less  diferentiated 
than normal cells, exhibit the characteristics of rapidly growing cells, i.e is, high nucleus 
to cytoplasm ratio, prominent nucleoli and many mitosis. 
The presence of invading cells in otherwise normal tissue  is an indication of malignancy. 
Cancer is caused mainly by mutations in somatic cells. S econdly, the cancer results 
from the accumulation of as few as three to as many as twenty  mutations, in genes that 
regulate cell divisidn. These mutations bring two basic ch anges in the cancer cells. First, 
the metastatic cells break their contact with other cells and overcome the restrictions 
on cell movement provided by basal lamina and other barrier s, ultimately metastatic 
cells can invade other parts of the body. Secondly, they prol iferate, unlimitedly, without 
considering the checks or programmes of the body.
MEIOSIS
     
   Meiosis is the special type of cell division in which the number of chromosomes in 
daughter cells is reduced to half, as compared to the pare nt cell. In animals at the time 
of gamete formation, while in plants when spores are produc ed. Each diploid cell after 
meiosis produces four haploid cells, because it involves two consecutive divisions after 
single replication of DNA. Two divisions, are meiosis I and  meiosis II. The irst meiotic 
division is the reduction division, whereas second meiotic di vision is just like the mitosis. 
Both divisions can further be divided into substages like pr ophase 1, metaphase 1, 
anaphase 1, telophase 1 and same names are used for me iosis II also (Fig.21.4).
Prophase I
This is very prolonged phase, and difers from the prophas e of mitosis, because in this 
chromosomes behave as homologous pairs. Each diploid cell ha s two chromosomes 
of each type, one member from each parent, because of fus ion of male and female 
gametes. Each chromosome has two chromatids, because chromosom es have been 
replicated during interphase. The interphase of meiosis lacks G2 stage. These similar 
but not necessarily identical chromosomes are called as hom ologous chromosomes. 
Prophase 1 further consists of the followings stages.1121. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Leptotene:      
          The chromosomes become visible, shorten and thick . The size of the nucleus 
increases and homologous chromosomes start getting closer to each  other.1221. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Zygotene:      First essential phenomenon of meiosis i.e., pairing of homol ogous 
chromosomes called synapsis starts. This pairing is high ly speciic and exactly pointed, 
but with no deinite starting point(s). Each paired but not fus ed, complex structure is 
called bivalent or tetrad.
Pachytene:  The pairing of homologous chromosomes is completed. Chromosomes  
become more and more thick. Each bivalent has four chromatid s, which wrap around 
each other. Non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes excha nge their 
segments due to chiasmata formation, during the process call ed crossing over. In this 
way reshuling of genetic material occurs which produces recombinations. Pachytene 
may lasts for days, weeks or even years, whereas leptotene  and zygotene can last only 
for few hours.
Diplotene:      The paired chromosomes repel each other and begin to separ ate. Separation 
however, is not complete, because homologous chromosomes remain united by their
point of interchange (chiasmata). Each bivalent has at leas t one such point, the 
chromatids otherwise are separated (Fig. 21.5).
Fig. 21.5 Chiasmata formation1321. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Diakinesis :     During this phase the condensation of chromosomes reaches  to its 
maximum. At the same time separation of the homologous chromosome s (started 
during diplotene) is completed, but still they are united a t one point, more often at 
ends. Nucleoli disappear.
Metaphase I
     Nuclear membrane disorganizes at the beginning of this phase. Spindle ibers originate 
and the kinetochore ibers attach to the kinetochore of homologous c hromosome from 
each pole and arrange bivalents at the equator. The sister chromatids of individual 
chromosome in bivalent behave as a unit.
Anaphase I
      The kinetochore ibers contract and the spindle or pole  ibers elongate, which 
pull the individual chromosome (each having two chromatids) tow ards their respective 
poles. It may be noted here that in contrast to anaphase of mitos is, sister chromatids 
are not separated. This is actually reduction phase becau se each pole receives half of 
the total number of chromosomes.1421. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Telophase I
Nuclear membrane reorganizes around each set of chromosome s at two poles, nucleoli 
reappear thus two nuclei each with half number of chromosom es are formed, later on 
cytoplasm divides thus terminating the irst meiotic division. I t is also to be noted that 
chromosomes may decondense during this stage.
Meiosis II
After telophase I two daughter cells experience small inte rphase, but in contrast to 
interphase of mitosis there is no replication of chromosomes.
Prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II and telophase II  are just like the respective 
phases of mitosis during which the chromosomes, condense, m itotic apparatus forms, 
chromosomes arrange at the equator, individual/sister chromati ds move apart, and 
ultimately four nuclei at the respective poles of two daughter cells (formed after meiosis 
I) are formed. Cytokinesis takes place and four haploid c ells, with half of the number of 
chromosomes (chromatids) are formed.
Importance of Meiosis
     Crossing over and random assortment of chromosomes are two signiicant happenings 
of meiosis. During crossing over, parental chromosomes exchan ge segments with 
each other which results in a large number of recombinati ons. At the same time 
during anaphase the separation of homologous chromosomes is ra ndom, which gives 
very wide range of variety of gametes. Both these phenomena c ause variations and 
modiications in the genome. These variations are not only the b ases of evolution, but 
also make every individual speciic, particular and uniq ue in his characteristics. Even 
the progeny of very same parents, i.e., brothers and sister s are not identical to each 
other.
Meiosis usually takes place at the time of sexual cell (g amete) formation, spore formation 
in plants, thus having the number of chromosomes in each, w hich is restored after 
fertilization and maintains chromosome number constant genera tion after generation. 
Had meiosis not been the process, the chromosome number may have been doubled 
after every generation. Can you imagine the consequences?1521. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
MEIOTIC ERRORS (NON-DISJUNCTION)
       Meiosis is an orderly occurring phenomenon, which ensur es every phase with 
appropriate inish, but some times, at any point the result ma y be unexpected, causing 
abnormalities.One of such abnormalities is chromosome non-di sjunction, in which  
chromosomes fail to segregate during anaphase and telophase  and do not inish with 
equal distribution of chromosome among all the daughter nucle i. This results either 
increase or decrease in the number of chromosomes, causin g serious physical, social 
and mental disorders. This non-disjunction may be in autos ome or in sex chromosome. 
Some examples of each type may be discussed below in som e detail.
Down’s Syndrome (Mongolism)
      It is one of the consequences of autosomal non-disjuncti on in man, during which 
21st pair of chromosome fails to segregate, resulting in gam ete with 24 chromosome. 
When this gamete, fertilizes normal gamete the new individ ual will have 47 (2n + 1) 
chromosomes. Non-disjunction appears to occur in the ova and is  related to the age of 
mother. The chances of teenage mother having Down’s syndrome child is one in many 
thousands, forty years old mother, one in hundred chances a nd by forty-ive the risk-is 
three times greater. The afected individuals have lat, broa d face, squint eyes with the 
skin fold in the inner corner, and protruding tongue, menta l retardation, and defective 
development of central nervous system.
Autosomal non-disjunction may occur in other than 21st chromosome  which usually 
results in abortion, or death in very early age.
Klinefelter’s Syndrome
         These individuals have additional sex chromosome  e.g., 47 chromosomes (44 
.autosome + XXY). They are phenotypically male but have fr equently enlarged breasts, 
‘tendency to tallness, obesity, small testes with no sperms a t ejaculation and under 
developed secondary sex characters.
Males with 48 chromosomes (44 autosomes + XXXY), with 49 ch romosomes (44 
autosomes + XXXXY) and with 47 chromosomes (44 autosomes + XY Y) are also observed 
(Fig. 21.6).
Turner’s Syndrome
These afected individuals have one missing X chromosome wi th only 45 •chromosomes 
(44 autosomes + X). Individuals with this condition often do not survive pregnancy and 
are aborted. Those who survive have female appearance with short stature, webbed 
neck, without ovaries and complete absence of germ cells.1621. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
 
 
Frequency Chromosomes Sex Syndrome
Births Abortions
1/700 1/40 Trisomy 21 M or F Down
1/15,000 1/33 Trisomy 13 M or F Patau
1/6,000 1/200 Trisomy 18 M or F Edward
1/6,000 1/18 XO F Turner
1/1,500 0 XXX or (XXXX) F Metafemale
1/1,500 0 XXY or (XXXY) M Klinefelter
1/1,000 ? XYY M Jacobs
Fig. 21.6 Non-disjunction of autosomes (a) Non disjunction occ urring during meiosis I and
meiosis II, gametes (asterisks mark points of non-disjunction), (b) Fre quency of syndromes1721. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
Necr osis and Apoptosis
     Cells in an organism depend upon various extracellu lar and intracellular signals for 
its regulated, controlled activities like cell division, patter n formation, diferentiation, 
morphogenesis and motility. Each cell is predestined to its fate i.e., what responsibility 
it has to take and in which way. Even the death of the cell is programmed.
         Programmed cell death helps in proper control of multicellular development, which 
may lead to deletion of entire structure (e.g., the tail of de veloping human embryos) 
or part of structure (e.g., tissue between developing digits) . Cell death even controls 
the number of neurons, because most of the neurons in the hu man body die during 
development.
          Cell death in multicellular organisms is contr olled by two fundamentally diferent 
ways, i.e., either the cell commits suicide in the absen ce of survival signals (trophic 
factors) or cells are murdered by killing signals from other cells.
            Internal programme of events and sequence of morphological changes by 
which cell commits suicide is collectively called as apop tosis (Greek word that means 
dropping of or falling of).1821. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
 
During this process the dying cells 
shrink and condense ultimately split 
up, thus releasing small membrane 
bounded apoptotic bodies, which are 
generally phagocytosed by other cells 
(Fig.21.7). Intracellular constituents 
are not released freely in extracellular 
atmosphere which otherwise might 
have deleterious efects. In contrast 
to suicide, the cell death due to tissue 
damage is called necrosis, during which 
the Fig21.7 typical cell swells and bursts, 
releasing the intracellular contents, 
which can damage neighbouring cells 
and cause inlammation.
Fig: 21.7 Ultrastructural features of cell death by apoptosis1921. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
1. Mongolism is also known as_______ .
2. During_______  homologous chromosomes get close to each other.
3. ________phase precedes G2 phase.
4. Polar microtubules during anaphase.
5. Mitotic apparatus is formed during_______ of cell division.
6. The chromosome number (44+1) denotes______Syndrome.
7. Intracellular contents are released during the type of cell death called ---------.EXERCISE
Q.1 Fill in the blanks.
 Q.3  Write true / false against each statement, if It i s false, rewrite tfhettmie 
statement
1. Meiosis occurs in haploid cells only.
2. Cell cycle is comprised of two phases i.e. karyokinesis and cytokinesis.
3. A point where non-sister chromatids cross  each other is called kinetochore.
4. G0 stands for no gap,
5. Full life cycle of yeast cells require 90 seconds to be completed.
6. Crossing over takes place during metaphase I.2021. Cell Cycle eLearn.Punjab
7. Autosomal non disjunction may occur in chromosomes other than  21st    chromosome, 
8. Benign tumors are always non localized,
9. Cancer is caused mainly by mutations in germ cells.
10. Genetic informations remain unchanged during mitosis.
11. Homologous chromosomes are necessarily identical.
12. The cells are kept alive due to trophic factors.
13. Cytokinesis involves the division of cytochromes.
14. Phragmoplast is a type of fragmentation.
1.  Diferentiate between necrosis and apoptosis.
2. What are the functions of mitotic apparatus?
3. How can you identify the cancer cells?
4. Give importance and signiicance of meiosis.
5. Deine chromosomal non disjunction.
6. What are symptoms of turner’s syndrome?
7. Deine cell cycle. Highlight its importance and signiican ce.
8. Is interphase a resting phase? Why?
9. In what respect does mitosis in plant cells difer from that in animal cells?
 
1. How does cytokinesis occur in animals cells? In which wa y does it difer from that in 
plant cell?
2. Why and how do the chromosomes get separated during anaphas e of mitosis?
3. What is the role of centriole in an animal cell? How is thi s function carried out in 
plant cell?
4. In what respect can cell death be regarded beneicial?
5. Compare mitosis with meiosis and describe their importance.
6. Deine disjunction and discuss its efect.
7. Describe meiosis and explain its signiicance.Q.4.                Short questions
Q3.               Extensive questions.