CHAPTER
25ECOSYSTEM
Animation 25: Ecosystem
Source and Credit: Microbewiki225. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
INTRODUCTION
The term ecology comes from the Greek words oikos. meaning “th e family household”, 
and logy, meaning “ the study of”. The term originally wa s coined by the German 
zoologist Ernst Haeckel in 1866. He called it oecologic and deined it as the study of the 
relationship of animals (organisms) to their environment.
  Environment includes not only the physical but also the biol ogical conditions under 
which an organism lives. Relationship includes interaction s with the physical world and 
with members of other species and the same species.
 ECOSYSTEM
The major unit of ecology is the ecosystem. Organisms intera ct with their environment 
within the conines of the ecosystem. The eco part of the word i s related to the 
environment and the system part means a collection of related parts that function as a 
unit. The ecosystem consists of two basic interacting components , the living or biotic, 
and the physical or abiotic factors.(Fig.25.1)
            Biotic components consist of animals, plants, fu ngi, micro-organisms etc. and 
abiotic components are atmosphere, climate, soil, and water.
             The various kinds of organisms that inhabit a n ecosystem make up populations.
Population  is a group of interbreeding individuals (same species)  occurring together 
in space and time. Populations of plants and animals in th e ecosystem do not function 
independently of each other. 
Animation 25: Ecosystem
Source and Credit: Water for Life325. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
   
Some populations compete with other populations for resources, su ch as food, water, or 
space. In some cases, one population is the food resource f or another. Two populations 
may mutually beneit each other. All populations within an e cosystem are known as a 
community and are in one or another manner interconnected to one another.
    The ecosystem has many levels. On our level, individu al organism, including man, both 
responds to and inluences the physical environment. At the n ext level, individuals of 
the same species form population, that can be described in  terms of number, growth 
rate, and age distribution. Further, individuals of these p opulations interact among 
themselves and with individuals of other species and form a  community.
    Major types of ecosystems, those that occupy broad geograph ical regions are 
called biomes. Each biome consists of a combination of plants  and animals in the fully 
developed climax community, and is characterized by a un iform life-form of vegetation 
such as grass or coniferous trees. Some major terrestrial b iomes are forest, grass land, 
and desert. Combined the biomes of earth together form the pla netary ecosystem.
Fig. 25.1 Your environment425. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Biosphere
Biosphere is a thin layer of earth in which all living or ganisms exist. Organisms within 
the biosphere not only adapt themselves to the environment but als o interact to modify 
and control chemical and physical conditions of the biospher e. An organism lives in a 
habitat.
An organism responds to a variety of environmental factors, and  only when all of them 
are within the range of tolerance, it can inhabit a location.  The actual location of place 
where an organism lives is called its  habitat.
In 1917, Joseph Grinnell an American ornithologist irst prop osed the term niche in 
ecology. The habitat and niche are closely related. Niche  is deined as the ultimate 
distributional unit within which a species is restrained  by the limitations of its physical 
structure and its physiology. Charles Eltan considered the niche, the basic role of an 
organism in the community-what it does in and for living comm unity, its relationship to 
its food and enemies. In other words, he deined the niche as the species’s occupation.
It refers to a profession or job of an organism. Ecosystems ar e composed of organisms 
with diferent jobs or ways of life, particularly concerned  with feeding, the role of a 
particular species within an ecosystem, including all a spects of its interaction with the 
living and the non-living environment.
         
     
Ecological niche with habitat also speciies how the organism  gets its supply of energy 
and materials - for example organism’s predators, prey a nd competitors as well as its 
behavior and interactions are considered elements of its nic he.  “A niche is deined as the role a species plays in a community including behavior and 
inluence.”525. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
 
In addition, niche includes all the physical factors of th e environment necessary for 
survival, such as range of temperature, amount of humidity, the pH of the water and 
soil.
Autecology
    
Ecology is the study of relationship of living organisms to thei r environment. When 
you are studying a single population’s relationship to its en vironment it will be called 
as autecology. For example, you are studying 50 to 100 plan ts of soybean in order 
to know the efect of water pollution on their growth and yield, y ou are studying the 
single or one population of soybean plant, this study is autec ology.
Synecology
Growth responses of individual plants to their environment are a  complex factor. 
One factor can aggaravate the other factor. These factors inter act with one another. 
Complexity of environment depends upon the combination of various  factors. The 
study of the relationship of diferent communities (grouping of  populations) to their 
environment is called synecology  or community ecology.
When you study only one population, at diferent places in an  environment it will be 
autecology. But when you see all the populations at the same ti me it will be synecology. 
In synecology (the study of a community) you have to see the var ious aspects of 
community like the origin, structure and composition of the comm unity. You have to 
consider the history of community and also its dynamics beca use community is not a 
ixed entity but diferent changes are going to occur at difer ent times. While studying 
the community we come across three levels of integration : (i)  individual (ii) population 
(iii) community.625. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 25.2(b) A community Fig. 25.2(a) A population of birds
COMPONENTS OF ECOSYSTEM
As discussed earlier the ecosystem can be divided into two main components.
1. Biotic Components
Biotic components include all living organisms including plants and animals supported 
by biosphere. Biosphere is spread out over the surface of p lant earth extending about 
8-10 kilometers to the upper reaches of atmosphere and also the same distance into 
the depths of oceans.
Animation 25.2:Biotic v/s Abiotic Components 
Source and Credit: Ameoba Sisters725. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
2. Abiotic Components
Abiotic components include all non-living components air, wate r, and soil. In ecological 
term they are called as : (a) atmosphere — (atmo - air, sp here - place) (b) hydrosphere 
— (hydro - water, sphere - place) (c) lithosphere — (litho - earth,soil, sphere - place).
Processes in Ecosystem and Interaction between 
Biotic and Abiotic Components:
     The main processes occurring in an ecosystem inclu de feeding and the circulation 
of chemical elements, together with the energy lowing through  the ecosystem.
      An ecosystem is made up of three main components, the  producers, the consumers 
and the decomposers. All are concerned with the feeding p rocesses, the circulation of 
chemical elements and the low of energy.
      Producers  are the autotrophs green photosynthetic plants, which capture and 
bring light energy into the ecosystem. They are able to man ufacture organic food from 
simpler inorganic substances. They are autotrophic 
organisms.
       Consumers are all the organisms, primarily 
animals, which obtain energy directly or indirectly 
from the producers as ready-made organic food. 
They are mainly heterotrophic organisms.
   Decomposers  are mainly the fungi and bacteria, 
which obtain their energy from the dead and 
decaying plants and animals. They release chemical 
elements as ions. The main chemical ions are 
nitrates, ammonia, phosphates, potassium and 
calcium.
Food Chain
Basically, all animals depend on plants for their food. E agle may eat blue bird, but blue 
bird eats insects like caterpillar and caterpillar feed s on grass or green leaves. This is 
an example of a simple food chain.825. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Food Web
      Food web is actually “the combination of many food chai ns”. Food webs are not 
really as simple as described in Fig. 25.3, because  most animals eat more than one 
type of food at diferent times as fox does not feed entirely on rabbit but also takes 
beetles, rats etc.
        All the food chains and food webs begin with a gr een plant (producer) and may 
consist of three to ive links or trophic levels (Fig. 25.3).
Fig 25.3 Food Web and various trophic level925. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
       In a food web you will ind more complex trophic leve ls or food links. In ig (25.3). 
food chain T1 is the irst trophic producer level, Includes all green p lants, grass, and 
phytoplankton; T2 , second trophic level - primary consumers; T3, third trophic level - 
secondary consumers; T4 ,fourth trophic level - tertiary consumers.
         The variety of pathways in a food web helps to mai ntain the stability of the 
ecosystem. For example, owls prey on rabbits and mice. If  a disease reduces the rabbit 
population; fewer plants are consumed. The larger plant p opulation produces more 
fruits and seeds, which, in turn, support a larger mouse  population. The increased 
number of mice becomes the major food source for the owls. Th e rabbit population 
gradually increases, and these primary consumers  once  again become a food source 
for the owls. Thus nature maintains a balance.
SUCCESSION
Succession is a squence of changes in the community struc ture of an ecosystem 
over a period of time. Community changes alter the ecosystem i n ways that favours 
the competitors and species to replace their predecessors in  somewhat predictable 
manner until a stable, self sustaining climax community is reached. Succession is a 
kind of “community relay” in which assemblages of plants  and animals replace the 
earlier ones in a sequence that is at least somewhat predi ctable. The precise changes 
occurring during succession are as diverse as the environ ments in which succession 
occurs, but certain general stages can be recognized.
Animation 25.3: Succession
Source and Credit: Ameoba Sisters1025. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
In each case succession is initiated by a few hardy in vaders called pioneers and it ends 
with a diverse and relatively stable climax community.
Two Major Forms of Succession
     
 Succession on dry land takes two major forms, primary suc cession and secondary 
succession. During primary succession,  an ecosystem is forged from bare rock, sand 
or clear glacial pool where there was no trace of previous l ife.
     The formation of an ecosystem from scratch is a process  often requiring thousands 
of years. During secondary succession a new ecosystem deve lops after an existing 
ecosystem is disturbed as in case of forced ire or an aba ndoned farm ield. Secondary 
succession happens much more rapidly than primary succ ession because the previous 
community has left its mark in the form of improved soil and seeds. Primary succession 
starting in a pond is called hydrosere and that on a dry s oil or habitat is called xerosere. 
Plants growing in xeric condition are called xerophytes, w hich are able to withstand 
prolonged periods of water shortage. Succullent plants such as the cacti have water 
stored in large parenchyma tissue, others have leaf modiic ation. Xerosere has the 
following diferent stages.
Crustose lichen stage : A crust is any external protective surface and crustose mea ns 
crusts on the substratum. Special types of lichens get impr egnated in the form of crust. 
They can live in extreme conditions. Sometimes, their surfa ce is wet due to rain and 
dew- drops. They absorb water during dry season. They a re quiescent or dormant, 
normally desiccated during dry season.
Foliage lichen stage:  In this stage the lichens are just like crumpled leaves  attached at 
one point. It produces shade to the crustose lichens as a res ult of which their growth 
is reduced or decreased. The area becomes rough , as m ore and more issures and 
depressions develop. Common examples are, Dermatocarpon, Par mellia, etc. At this 
stage other plants invade called moss stage, because now soi l is more porous with 
some litter of lichens.1125. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Moss stage : This is the third stage with mosses like, Polytrichum, T ortula etc. They 
compete with lichens for water and penetrate much deeper i nto the soil as compared 
to the lichens, adding more humus to the soil.
Herbaceous (plant) stage :  Small seedling of herbaceous plants now establish due to 
the more availability of moisture, humus and soil for anchora ge.
Shrub stage : Shrubby plants now start growing, dominating and shadowing herbaceous 
plants which die to add more humus to the soil.
Climax forests:  The soil is improved to an extent that it now allows the growth/ 
establishment of woody plants. The shade of these plants inh ibits the growth of most 
plants other than mosses, lichens, a few ferns etc. Woody p lants dominate and this 
stage in succession remains essentially the same if nothi ng changes in the environment 
to upset the balance. Because it is a stable stage in succ ession, the woody forest is 
considered to be the climax stage for this region (Fig. 25. 4).
Fig. 25.4 Primary Succession1225. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Bare ground Lichens+algae Mosses+ferns Gras ses Shrubs Trees
                            Pioneer comm unity                                   → → → →→Seral communities (seral stages)
                            Climax commu nity
Predation and its Signiicance
     
 An animal that preys on other 
animals is a predator. A predator is a 
consumer. The animal that is caught 
and eaten is the prey.  The over all 
process is called predation.
     The sizes of populations of 
predator and prey are related 
to each other. The size of each 
population is determined by the size 
of the other. If the number of prey is 
large, this leads to an increase in the 
number of predators; as predator 
feeds upon the prey, the number of 
prey begins to fall. The number of 
predators also decreases, since they 
have smaller food supply. As the 
number of predators decreases, the 
number of prey begins to increase. 
This food relationship of predator - 
prey creates a “cycle”.
      Examples: cat/mouse, fox/rabbit, 
seal/ish, frog/mosquito, hawk/small 
birds etc.1325. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Parasitism and its Signiicance
This is an association between a host and a parasite, whic h involves providing the 
parasite with food, protection and conditions for its survival. Th e parasite may or may 
not harm the host. Diseases in living organisms, which are caused by parasites are 
called infestations. Parasites may be  ectoparasites,  living outside the body of the 
host e.g. fungi causing dandruf in hair and endoparasites,  living inside the body of 
the host e.g. tape worm in intestine of man.
  Symbiosis
It is an association between two organisms, which brings be neit to both the organisms.
 Root Nodules:  The legume plant , pea  and bean, are the hosts to symbiont bacteria, 
which inhabit the roots forming root nodules. The bacteria in the root nodules ix 
nitrogen in soil from air, converting it into amino acid, whic h the host uses. In return, 
host provides bacteria with food and protection.
Mycorrhiza : Mycorrhiza is an association between the roots of plants growin g in acid 
soil and certain fungi. The host is pine, beech or heathe r and it provides the fungus 
with an enzyme to digest carbohydrates in leaf litter. In r eturn, the fungus symbiont 
passes mineral ions from the soil to the host.
Mutualism:     
          It is the relationship between two organisms in which both the  organisms beneit 
from each other. Lichens are an example of mutualism betw een a fungus and an alga. 
The relationship between insects and lowering plants is a nother example. The insect 
gets nectar from the lower; the lowers are able to reproduce because the insects 
carry pollen from lower to lower.1425. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Lichens:   
      Lichen is a dual organism composed of symbiotic association of an alga living within 
a fungus mycelium. The lichens grow on exposed rock sur faces and are important 
colonizers of bare ground.
Commensalism
In this type of relationship only one organism beneits from th e relationship. The other 
is not afected at all. For example, sharks may have small  ish called remoras attached 
to them. As the shark feeds, the remoras pick up the scrap s. The remoras beneit . 
from this relationship, the shark is not afected at all.
Grazing
Many animals like rabbits, goats, sheeps, cows, bufaloes  and horses feed on grasses. 
This mode of feeding is called grazing and these anima ls are called grazers. These 
animals live in pastureland where they feed on grasses,  herbs and shrubs. If too many 
animals are kept on pasture, they eat the grasses down to the  root though grasses 
are more resistant than herbaceous plants and have ability to regrow very fast, but 
the hooves of grazing animals trample the soil into hard laye r as a result of which rain 
water will not penetrate this soil. It runs of from the upper surface removing the fertile 
topsoil with it. The inal result of over - grazing is totally b arren land. Grazing is very 
important factor in determining the ecosystem. Moderate grazin g is very helpful to 
maintain grassland ecosystem. It destroys the competitors and helps the grass to grow 
well. Over grazing may lead to the transformation of a grass land into a desert.1525. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES
The chemical elements essential for life in living organ isms are called biogenic elements 
or nutrient elements. Macronutrients are elements required by organisms in large 
amount like water, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosp horus, sulphur and 
calcium. Micronutrients are elements required by organis ms in small quantity or in 
trace amount like zinc, molybdenum, iron, iodine. The nutr ient cycles are also called 
biogeochemical cycles as the nutrients move from living to nonl iving to living portions 
of ecosystem in a cyclic manner.
The Nitrogen Cycle
The chief reservoir of nitrogen is the atmosphere; in fact n itrogen makes up 78 percent 
of the gases in atmosphere. Since most living things, however , cannot use elemental 
atmospheric nitrogen to make amino acids and other nitrogen con taining compounds, 
they are dependent on nitrogen present in soil minerals. S o, despite the abundance of 
nitrogen in the atmosphere, shortage of nitrogen in the soil is  often the major limiting 
factor in plant growth. The process by which this limited a mount of nitrogen is circulated 
and re-circulated throughout the world of living organisms is  known as the nitrogen 
cycle (Fig. 25.5).
Animation 25.4: Nitrogen Cycle
Source and Credit: MicrobeWiki1625. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Fig 25.5 The Nitrogen Cycle1725. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
   
Three principal stages of this cycle are, ammoniication, nitriication, and 
assimilation.
   Much of the nitrogen  found in the soil is the result of th e decomposition of organic 
materials and is in the form of complex organic compounds, such as proteins, amino 
acids, nucleic acids and nucleotides. These nitrogenous compounds are usually rapidly 
decomposed into simple compounds by soil-dwelling organisms  chiely bacteria and 
fungi. These microorganisms use the proteins and amino ac ids and release excess of 
ammonia (NH3) or ammonium ions (NH4+ ). This process is known as ammoniication.
     Several bacteria in soil are able to oxidize ammonia or ammonium ions, this oxidation 
is known as nitriication.
    Although the plants can utilize ammonium directly, nitr ate is the form in which 
most nitrogen moves from the soil into the roots. Once nitrate is wi thin the plant 
cell, it is reduced back to ammonium. In contrast to the nitri ication, this assimilation 
process requires energy. The ammonium ions thus formed a re transferred to carbon 
- containing compounds to produce amino - acids and other nitr ogenous organic 
compounds needed by the plant.
Animation 25.5: Nitrogen Cycle
Source and Credit: OrganicSoilTechnology1825. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Nitrogen Depletion and its Remedies
     Although the nitrogen cycle appears complete and self  - sustaining, nitrates are 
steadily lost due to the soil erosion, ire and water percolatin g down through the 
soil. Nitrates are also lost as a result of the activities of ce rtain soil bacteria; in the 
absence of oxygen these bacteria break down nitrates relea sing nitrogen back into 
the atmosphere and using the oxygen for their own respiration . This process is known 
as denitriication, in poorly drained (poorly aerated) soils.  The cycle is maintained 
despite these losses primarily by the activities of the nitrog en - ixing bacteria, which 
incorporate gaseous nitrogen from air into organic nitrogen conta ining compounds. 
Just as all organisms are ultimately dependent on photosynthe sis for energy, they 
all depend on nitrogen ixation for their nitrogen. Soil nitroge n resources are also 
strengthened by the addition of nitrogen ferlitizers by the m an himself.
The low of Energy in Food Chain of an Ecosystem
Energy in the form of radiant heat and light from the sun l ows through an ecosystem 
passing through the diferent trophic levels (links) and ra diates again back into outer 
space. The total amount of energy ixed by plants is gross p rimary production. The 
amount of energy left after plants have met their respiratory needs is net primary 
production, which shows up as plant biomass.
Animation 25.6:Flow of Energy
Source and Credit: Steemit1925. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
        
About 1% of the total energy from the sun is trapped by the pr oducers in an ecosystem. 
The remaining 99% of solar energy is used to evaporate wate r, heat up soil and is then 
lost to the outer space. As energy is transferred from one trop hic level to the next, 
from producer to primary consumer, between 80 to 90% of  las t as the original energy 
is heat as a by product of respiration. However, a continuous lux of energy from the 
sun prevents ecosystem from running down. A pyramid of ene rgy can be constructed 
showing energy transfer in a community of organisms.2025. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
A short food chain of two or three links supports a community mor e eiciently than a 
long chain of ive Links where much of the original energy  from the producers would 
never reach those organisms at higher trophic levels. Decompos ers are able to obtain 
energy by converting plant and animal tissues and waste i nto inorganic mineral ions.
An Energy Pyramid2125. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q1    Fill in the blanks.
1. A group of similar organisms living together in space and time is called_________ .
2. Organisms which can synthesize their own food are called ______ .
3. Animals, non-green plants and microorganisms directly or indirectly depend upon 
green plants for their food so they so are called__________ __ .
1. At diferent places in an environment when you study only one populati on, it will be synecology.
2. Abiotic components include all living components.
3. Primary succession starting in a pond is called xerosere.
4. The animal that is caught and eaten is the predator.
5. Endoparasites live inside the body of the host.Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and w rite the correct statement 
if false.
Q.4    Short questions.
1. What are the biogeochemical cycles?
2. Sketch three mainsteps in nitrogen cycle.
3. Deine grazing.
4. What percentage of sun energy reaches to plants?
5. What is autecology?
6. Deine synecology.2225. Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
1. Deine environment. What must environment supply for insects, green plan ts, birds, animals 
and people?
2. What factors in the environment can afect all living things? Are th ey important to survive in a 
biome?
3. What can you conclude about all the physical and biologic al factors in an environment?
4. What is biosphere? What must the biosphere provide for living thin gs? Why is a biosphere absent 
on moon?
5. Deine succession. Discuss succession on land.Q.5 Extensive Questions.