CHAPTER
24Evolution
Animation 24: Evolution
Source & Credit: Wikispaces224. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
       
Questions of origins of earth and life on it have been on the minds of humans since 
prehistoric times. Many of us are also concerned with ques tions of origin: How old is 
the planet earth? How long has life been on earth? How did life arise on earth? How did 
a certain animal species come into existence? Answers for  these questions come from 
scientiic inquiry. In this chapter we will study some as pects of organic evolution.
Evolution refers to the processes that have transformed life on e arth from its earliest 
forms to the vast diversity that we observe today. Evolutionary chang e is based mainly on 
the interactions between populations of organisms and their en vironments. Whenever 
we say or hear the word evolution, name of Darwin comes in our  mind immediately. In 
fact, he was the irst person who argued from evidence that s pecies were not specially 
created in their present forms, rather they had evolved from ancestral species. He also 
proposed a mechanism for evolution, which he termed Natural Selection.
CONCEPT OF EVOLUTION VS SPECIAL CREATION
       
In a bid to explain the cause of diversity of life and inte rrelationship among living 
organisms, two schools of thought emerged in the earlier 19th century. Creationists 
believed in the Theory of Special Creation, whereas evolution ists believed in the Theory 
of Natural Selection. According to the theory of special creati on, all living things came 
into existence in their present forms especially and spec iically created by Nature. 
Among the scientists who believed in divine creation was Car olus Linnaeus (1707-1778). 
    
Animation 24.1: Evolution
Source & Credit: wilegif324. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Achievements Life Span Scientist’s Name
Sought and found order in the 
diversity of life. He introduced 
binomial nomenclature for 
naming species.
Published his theory of 
evolution.1707-1778
1744-1829Linnaeus
Lamarck
Published Essay on the 
“Principle of Population”.1766-1834 Malthus
Contributed much to the 
science of Palaeontology and 
explained Earth’s history by 
catastrophism.1769-1832 Cuvier
Published Principles of 
Geology.1797-1875 Lyell
1. Voyage of the Beagle 
2. Began his notebooks on the 
origin of species. 
3. Wrote his essay on the 
origin of species.1809-1882 Darwin
Published papers on 
inheritance.1822-1884 Mendel
Sent his theory to Darwin. 1823-1913 Wallace
     
The idea that organisms might evolve through time, with one type  of organism giving 
rise to another type of organism, is an ancient one, existing  from the days of Aristotle. 
Aristotle recognized that organisms ranged from relatively si mple to very complex 
structures. However, the present day concept of evolution is bas ed on a known  history 
(Table 24.1).
Let us now discuss some details of the work done by these sc ientists. As you know, 
Carolus Linnaeus in the eighteenth century classiied orga nisms. He grouped similar 
species in the same genus and similar genera in one f amily. But as a natural theologian, 
he believed that species were permanent creations. A centu ry later, the taxonomic 
system of Linnaeus became a focal point in Darwin’s argum ents for evolution.424. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
 EVOLUTION FROM PROKARYOTES TO EUKARYOTES
 
One of the speculations trying to explain the origin of life is that it may have begun 
deep in the oceans, in underwater hot springs called hyd rothermal vents. These vents 
could have supplied the energy and raw materials (for the  origin and survival of early 
life forms. A group of bacteria, called archaeobactiria-th at tolerate temperatures up 
to 120°C and seem to have undergone less evolutionary ihange than any other living 
species supports this vent hypothesis.
The nutrients produced in the primitive environment would have  limited early life., If life 
were to continue, another source of nutrients was needed. Photos ynthesis, probably 
freed living organisms from a dwindling supply of nutrie nts. The irst photosynthetic 
organisms probably used hydrogen sulide as a source of h ydrogen for reducing 
carbon dioxide to sugars. Later, water served this same pur pose, and oxygen liberated 
by photosynthetic reactions began to accumulate in the atmospher e. Earth and its 
atmosphere slowly began to change.
Ozone in the upper atmosphere began to ilter ultraviolet radia tion from the sun, the 
reducing atmosphere slowly became an oxidizing atmosphere , and at least some living 
organisms began to utilize oxygen. About 420 million years ago, enough protective 
ozone had built up to make life on land possible. Ironicall y, the change from a 
reducing atmosphere to an oxidizing atmosphere also meant tha t life could no longer 
arise abiotically .The irst cells were most likely very s imple prokaryotic forms. The 
prokaryotes may have arisen more than 3.5 billion years ag o. Eukaryotes are thought to 
have irst appeared about 1.5 billion years ago. The euka ryotic cell might have evolved 
when a large anaerobic (living without oxygen) amoeboid prok aryote ingested small 
aerobic (living with oxygen) bacteria and stabilized them instead of digesting them. 
This idea is known as the endosymbiont hypothesis (Fig.24. la) and was irst proposed 
by Lynn Margulis. According to this hypothesis, the aerobic  bacteria developed into 
mitochondria, which are the sites of aerobic respiration and  most energy conversion 
in eukaryotic cells. The possession of these mitochondria  l ike endosymbionts brought 
the advantage of aerobic respiration to the host.524. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
  
Flagella (whiplike structures) may have arisen through th e ingestion of prokaryotes 
similar to spiral-shaped bacteria called spirochetes. In gestion of prokaryotes that 
resembled present-day cyanobacteria could have led to the e ndosymbiotic development 
of chloroplasts in plants. 
Another hypothesis for the evolution of eukaryotic cells proposes that the prokaryotic 
cell membrane invaginated (folded inward) to enclose copie s of its genetic material 
(Fig. 24.1b). This invagination resulted in the formation of  several double  membrane-
bound entities (organelles) in a single cell. These enti ties could then have evolved into 
the eukaryotic mitochondrion, nucleus, chloroplast etc. 
Whatever the exact mechanism for the evolution of the eukaryotic cell might be, the 
formation of the eukaryotic cell led to a dramatic increase i n the complexity and diversity 
of life-forms on the earth. At irst, these newly formed euka ryotic cells existed only by 
themselves. Later, however, some probably evolved into multicell ular organisms in 
which various cells became specialized into tissues, whi ch, in turn, formed organs for 
many diferent functions. These multicellular forms then a dapted themselves to life in 
a great variety of environments. 
Animation 24.2: Evolution from Prokaryots to Euokaryot
Source & Credit: Ameoba Sisters624. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Figure 24.1: Two hypothesies on the evolution of the eukaryoti c cell. (a) Endosymbiont hypothesis, (b) Membrane invagi nation 
hypothesis. (1) A prokaryotic cell (2) Duplicates its gene tic material (genome) (3) The plasma membrane then inva ginates to form 
double membrane-bound organelles, and the individual genomes  separate from each other (4) The nuclear genome eventually 
enlarges, while the other organelle genomes lose many of their ge nes, resulting in a eukaryotic cell.
INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS
   
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, several naturalists  suggested that life had 
evolved along with the evolution of earth. But only one of Darwin’s predecessors 
developed a comprehensive model that attempted to explain how li fe evolves. Jean 
Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829) published his theory of evolu tion in 1809, the year 
Darwin was bom. Lamarck was in-charge of invertebrate coll ection at the Natural 
History Museum in Paris. He presented a mechanism to exp lain how speciic 
adaptations evolve. Lamarck argued that those parts of the body u sed extensively 
to cope with the environment become larger and stronger, while  those that are not 
used deteriorate.724. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Among the examples Lamarck cited were the blacksmith deve loping a bigger bicep 
in the arm that works the hammer and girafe stretching its neck to new lengths in 
pursuit of leaves to eat. The second idea Lamarck adopted, w as called the inheritance 
of acquired characteristics. In this concept of heredity, th e modiications an organism 
acquires during its lifetime can be passed along to its of spring’e.g. the long neck of 
the girafe, Lamarck reasoned, evolved gradually as the cu mulative product of a great 
many generations of ancestors stretching higher and higher . However, now we know 
that acquired characteristics cannot be inherited.
Charles Darwin 
     
Charles Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, in Western Engl and, in 1809. He joined ’ the 
expedition on Beagle to South American coastline. He observed and collected thousands 
of specimens of diverse fauna and lora of South America. H e noticed that the fauna 
and lora of the diferent regions of the continent had a deini te South American stamp, 
very distinct from the life forms of Europe. Furthermore, the South American fossils 
that Darwin found, though clearly diferent from modem specie s, were distinctly South 
American in their resemblance to the living plants and an imals of that continent.
A particularly puzzling case of geographical distribution  was the fauna of the Galapagos 
islands. Most of the animal species on the Galapagos live now here else in the world, 
although they resemble species living on the South American  mainland. It was as 
though the islands were colonized by plants and animals th at strayed from the South 
American mainland and then diversiied on the diferent is lands. Among the birds 
Darwin collected on the Galapagos were 13 types of inches tha t, although quite similar, 
seemed to be diferent species. Some were unique to individ ual islands, while other 
species were distributed on two or more islands that were cl ose together.
 
After returning to Great Britain in 1836, Darwin perceived th e origin of new species 
and adaptations as closely related processes. A new speci es would arise from an 
ancestral form by the gradual accumulation of adaptations to d iferent environments, 
separated from original habitat by geographical barriers.  Over many generations, the 
two populations could become dissimilar enough to be designate d as separate species. 
This is apparently what happened to the  Galapagos  inches.824. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
By the early 1840s, Darwin had worked out the major feature s of his theory of natural 
selection as the mechanism of evolution. In 1844, Darwin wrote  a long essay on the 
origin of species and natural selection .   
But before it could be published Alfred Wallace, a young  naturalist working in the East 
Indies developed a theory of natural selection essentially i dentical to Darwin’s. Wallace’s 
paper, along with extracts from Darwin’s unpublished 1844  essay, were presented to 
the Linnaean Society of London on July 1, 1858. Darwin quic kly inished The Origin of 
Species  and published it the next year. In this book Darwin develop ed two main points:
 1. Descent with Modiication : 
Darwin believed in perceived unity in life, with all orga nisms related through descent 
from some common ancestor that lived in the remote past. In the Da rwinian view, the 
history of life is like a tree, with multiple branching a nd rebranching from a common 
trunk all the way to the tips of the living twigs, symbolic of the current diversity of 
organisms. At each fork of the evolutionary tree is an ancestor  common to all lines of 
evolution branching from that fork.
2. Natural Selection and Adaptation : 
Darwin suggested that populations of individual species becom e better adapted to 
their local environments through natural selection. Darwin’s th eory of natural selection 
was based on the following observations.
1. Production of more individuals than the environment can support,  leads to a struggle 
for existence among individuals of a population, with only a fraction of ofspring 
surviving each generation. 
2. Survival in the struggle for existence is not random,, but de pends in part on the 
hereditary constitution of the surviving individuals. Those ind ividuals whose inherited 
characteristics it them best to their environment are likely to leave more ofspring 
than the less it individuals. 
3. This unequal ability of individuals to survive and reproduc e will lead to a gradual 
change in a population, with favourable characteristics acc umulating over the 
generations thus leading to the evolution of a new species.924. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Neo-Darwinism - The modern evolutionary synthesis 
The Origin of Species  convinced most biologists that species are products of evolution. 
An important turning point for evolutionary theory was the birth of  population genetics, 
which emphasizes the extensive genetic variation within popu lations and recognizes 
the importance of quantitative characters. With progress in pop ulation genetics in the 
1930s, Mendelism and Darwinism were reconciled, and th e genetic basis of variation 
and natural selection was worked out. Thus, a comprehensive  theory of evolution that 
became known as the modern synthesis or Neo-Darwinism  was developed in the 
early 1940s. It is called a synthesis because it integr ated discoveries and idea« from 
many diferent ields, including paleontology, taxonomy, bioge ography, of course, 
population genetics.
Evidences of Evolution  
   
Evolution leaves observable signs. Darwin’s theory of evolution wa s mainly based on 
the evidence from the geographical distribution of species a nd from the fossil record. 
However, there have been many evidences as biology progress ed. New discoveries, 
continue to validate the evolutionary view of life. Let us discus s now some of the 
evidences.
Biogeography :  It was the geographical distribution of species— biogeography — that 
irst suggested the idea of evolution to Darwin. Islands have ma ny species of plants 
and animals that are endemic but closely related to specie s of the nearest mainland 
or neighboring island. Consider armadillos, the armored m ammals that live only in 
America. The evolutionary view of biogeography predicts that c ontemporary armadillos 
are modiied descendants of earlier species that occupied these continents, and the 
fossil record conirms that such ancestors existed.1024. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
The Fossil Record : The succession of fossil forms is a strong evidence in favou r of 
evolution. It provides a visual record in a complete series sh owing the evolution of 
an organism. For instance, evidence from biochemistry, mole cular biology, and cell 
biology places prokaryotes as the ancestors of all life, and  predicts that bacteria should 
precede all eukaryotic life in the fossil record. Indeed , the oldest known fossils are 
prokaryotes.
Another example is the chronological appearance of the dife rent classes of vertebrate 
animals in the fossil record. Fossil ishes, the earliest vertebrates, with amphibians 
next, followed by reptiles, then mammals and birds. This  sequence is consistent with 
the history of vertebrate descent. The evolution of horse provides an example of such 
a history.
Comparative Anatomy :  Anatomical similarities between species grouped in the 
same taxonomic category bring another support to the theory of the Descent with 
modiication. For example, the same skeletal elements make up the forelimbs of 
human, cats, whales, bats, and all other mammals, althoug h these appendages have 
very diferent functions. 
The basic similarity of these forelimbs is the consequenc e of mammals from a common 
ancestor. The amis, wings, lippers, and forelegs of dif erent mammals are variations 
on a common anatomical theme that has been modiied for diverge nt functions. 
Similarity in characteristics resulting from common ancestr y is known as homology, 
and such anatomical signs of evolution are called homologous s tructures. Comparative 
anatomy supports that evolution is a remodeling process in whic h ancestral structures 
that functioned in one capacity become modiied as they tale on  new functions. The 
lower parts of a lowering plant are homologous. They are cons idered to have evolved 
from leaves, to form sepals, petals, stamens and carpels Fossils are either the actual remains or - traces of organisms th at lived in ancient geological times. 
The organism may be embedded in sand, resin or ice, or an i mpression or cast is made of the 
body parts, the tissue being replaced or petriied by silica or ca lcium carbonate minerals. Most 
fossils are found in sedimentary rocks.1124. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
The oldest homologous structures are vestigial organs, rudimen tary structures of 
marginal, if any, use to the organism. Vestigial organs a re historical remnants of 
structures that had important functions in ancestors but are no longer essential 
presently. For instance, the skeletons of whales and some s nakes retain vestiges of the 
pelvis and leg bones of walking ancestors, (Fig. 24.2) ve rmiform appendix in carnivores, 
ear muscles in man etc.Homologous organs are functionally diferent but structurally alik e e.g. Fore limbs of man, bat, 
horse, whale etc. are example of divergent evolution. Analogous organs are functionally alike but 
structurally diferent e.g. wings of bat, birds and insects etc.  are examples of convergent evolution.
Fig. 24.2: The whale retains pelvic and leg bones as us eless vestiges1224. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Comparative Embryology :  Closely related organisms go through similar stages in thei r 
embryonic development. For example, all vertebrate embryos g o through a stage 
in which they have gill pouches on the sides of their throats . At embryonic stage of 
development, similarities between ishes, frogs, snakes, b irds, humans, and all other 
vertebrates are much more apparent than diferences (Fig.2 4.3). As development 
progresses, the various vertebrates diverge more and more, tak ing on the distinctive 
characteristics of their classes. In ish, for example, th e gill pouches develop into gills; 
in terrestrial vertebrates, these-embryonic structures become  modiied for other 
functions, such as the eustachian tubes that connect the midd le ear with the throat in 
humans.
Comparative embryology can often establish homology among structu res, such as gill 
pouches, that become so altered in later development that their common origin would 
not be apparent by comparing their fully developed forms.ig. 24.3 Homologies among vertebrates are clearly evident early in development, as the photos reveal. Embryo (a) turtle, ( b) mouse, 
(c) human, (d) chick.1324. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Molecular Biology:  Evolutionary relationships among species are relected in the ir 
DNA and proteins—in their genes and gene products. If two sp ecies have genes and 
proteins with sequences of monomers that match closely, the se quences must have 
been copied from a common ancestor. For example, a common ge netic code brings 
evidence that all life is related. Molecular biology has th us provided strong evidence in 
support of evolution as the basis for the unity and diversity of life. Similarly, taxonomically 
remote organisms, such as humans and bacteria, have some proteins in common. For 
instance, cytochrome c, a respiratory protein is found in al l aerobic species.
NATURAL SELECTION AND ARTIFICIAL SELECTION 
   
Natural selection occurs through an interaction between the en vironment and the 
variability inherent in any population. Darwin found eviden ce in artiicial selection, the 
breeding of domesticated plants and animals. Humans have modiied other species 
over many generation by selecting individuals with the desi red traits as breeding stock. 
The plants and animals we grow for food bear little resemb lance to their wild ancestors. 
From the changes achieved by artiicial selection within a relativ ely short period of 
time, Darvviq postulated that natural selection operating over vast s pans of time could 
account for the entire diversity of life. Population is a group  of inter-breeding individuals 
belonging to a particular species and sharing a common ge ographic area. 
Natural selection can amplify or diminish only those variati ons that are heritable. It is 
noteworthy to say that adaptations that an organism acquires by i ts own actions are 
not heritable. The speciics of natural selection are region al and timely; environmental 
factors vary from place to place and from time to time. An ada ptation in one situation 
may be useless or even detrimental in other circumstances.  An example of natural 
selection in action is the evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.1424. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
POPULATION, GENE POOL, ALLELE AND GENOTYPE FREQUENCIES
A population is a localized group of individuals belonging to the same species. For 
now, we will deine a species as a group of populations tha t have the potential to 
interbreed in nature. Each species has a geographical range within which individuals 
are not spread out evenly, but are usually concentrated in s everal localized populations. 
A population may be isolated from others of the same species,  exchanging genetic 
material only rarely. Such an isolation is particularly c ommon for populations conined 
to widely separated islands, unconnected lakes, or mountain  ranges separated by 
lowlands. Within a population individuals are concentrated i n centers and are more 
likely to interbreed with members of the same population than  with members of other 
populations. Therefore, individuals near a population center  are, on average, more 
closely related to one another than to members of other populations .
The total aggregate of genes in a population at any one time i s called the population’s 
gene pool. It consists of all alleles at all gene loci in a ll individuals of the population. For 
a diploid species, each locus is represented twice in th e genome of an individual, who 
may be either homozygous or heterozygous.
Animation 24.3: Gene Pool
Source & Credit: S-Cool1524. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
If all members of a population are 
homozygous for the same allele, that 
allele is said to be ixed  in the gene 
pool. More often, there are two or 
more alleles for a gene, each having 
relative frequency (proportion) in the 
gene pool. Let us consider an example. 
Imagine a wildlower population with 
two varieties contrasting in lower 
color. An allele for pink lowers, which 
we will symbolize by A, is completely 
dominant over an allele for white 
lowers, symbolized by a. Suppose 
these are the only two alleles for this 
locus in the population. Our imaginary 
population has 500 plants. Twenty 
have white lowers because they are 
homozygous for the recessive allele; 
their genotype is aa. Of the 480 plants 
with pink lowers, 320 are homozygous 
(AA) and 160 are heterozygous (Aa). 
Since these are diploid organisms, 
there are a total of lOOOcopies of genes 
for lower color in the population. The 
dominant allele accounts for 800 of 
these genes (320x2 = 640 for AA plants, 
plus 160x1 = 160 for An individuals). 
Thus, the frequency of the A allele in 
the gene pool of this population is 
80%, or 0.8. And since there are only 
two allelic forms of the gene, the a allele must have a fre quency of 20%, or 0.2. Related 
to these allele frequencies are the frequencies of genotyp es. In our model wildlower 
population, these frequencies are: AA=0.64 (64%) (320 ou t of 500 plants), Aa=0.32 
(160/500), and aa = 0.04 (20/500).Figure 24.4: The Hardy-Weinberg theorem. The genetic 
structure of a non  evolving population remains constant over 
the generations. Sexual recombination alone will not alter th e 
relative frequencies of alleles or genotypes, (p = frequency of A; 
q = frequency of a)1624. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
Hardy-Weinberg Theorem 
  
The frequencies of genotypes of non evolving populations are d escribed by Hardy- 
Weinberg theorem. Hardy-Weinberg theorem is named for the  two scientists who 
derived the principle independently in 1908. It states th at the frequencies of alleles 
and genotypes in a population’s gene pool remain constant over the generations 
unless acted upon by agents other than sexual recombination.  So shuling of alleles 
due to meiosis and random fertilization has no efect on the over all genetic structure 
of a population. A general formula, called the Hardy- Wei nberg equation is used for 
calculating the frequencies of alleles and genotypes in populations at equilibrium.
For a gene locus where only two alleles occur in a populati on, population geneticists 
use the letter p to represent the frequency of one allele an d the letter q to represent 
the frequency of the other allele. In the imaginary wildl ower population, p=0.8 and 
<7=0.2. Note that p+q= 1; the combined frequencies of all possible alleles must account 
for 100% of the genes for that locus in the population. If ther e are only two alleles and 
we know the frequency of one, the frequency of other can be  calculated:
Ifp + q-1, then 1-p = q, or l-q - p
When gametes combine their alleles to form zygotes, the proba bility of generating 
an AA genotype is p2. In the wildlower population, p-0.8, and p2=0.64, the probability 
of an A sperm fertilizing an A ovum to produce an AA zygote.  The frequency of 
individuals homozygous for the other allele (aa) is q2, or 0.2x0.2=0.04 for the wildlower 
population. There are two ways in which an Aa genotype can  arise, depending on which 
parent contributes the dominant allele. Therefore, the frequ ency of heterozygous 
individuals in the population is 2pq (2x0.8x0.2=0.32, in  our example). If we have 
calculated the frequencies of all possible genotypes corre ctly, they should add up to 1:
             P + 2pq       +       q2  =    1
 Frequency Frequency Frequency
 of AA  of Aa plus aA  ofaa
 For our wildlowers,this is 0.64 + 0.32 + 0.04=1*1724. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
 * In fact the Hardy-Weinberg equation is a binomial exp ansion: (p+q)2 or p2+2pq+q2
Factors afecting gene frequency 
Many factors can alter gene frequency. Out of these ive af ect the proportion of 
homozygotes and heterozygotes enough to produce signiicant deviati ons form the 
proportion claimed by Hardy Weinberg principle. They ar e relected in the table below.
Table 24.2 Factors for evolutionary change
Factor  Description
Mutation  The ultimate source of all changes; individual mutations occur so 
rarely that mutation alone does not change allele frequency much.
Migration A very potent agent of change, migration locally acts to prevent 
evolutionary changes by preventing populations that exchange 
members from diverging from one another. Emigration and 
immigration of members of a population, cause disturbance in th e 
gene pool.
Genetic drift  It is the change in frequency of alleles at a locus that occurs by 
chance. In small populations, such luctuations may lead to the loss 
of particular alleles. This may occur in a small populati on when a 
few individual fail to reproduce and then genes are lost from the 
population.
Non-random mating Inbreeding is the most common form; it does not alter allele 
frequency, but lessens the proportion of heterozyote individuals. 
Individuals with certain genotypes sometimes mate with one another 
more commonly than would be expected on a random basis. This 
is called non-random mating, causing the frequencies of partic ular 
genotypes to difer greatly from those predicted by the 1 lardy-
Weinberg principle.
Selection Some individuals leave behind more progeny than others, and the 
rate at which they do so is afected by their inherited characteristic s. 
This is called selection. Selection can be artiicial selection or n atural 
selection. In artiicial selection, the breeders select for the desired 
characters. In natural selection, the environment plays this role, th us 
afecting the proportions of gene in a population.1824. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
ENDANGERED SPECIES 
    
 
Extinction has been the fate of most plant and animal specie s. It is a natural process 
that will continue. In recent years, however, the threat to the welfare of wild plants and 
animals has increased dramatically—mostly as a result of habitat destruction. Tropical 
rain forests, the most threatened areas on the earth, have bee n reduced to 44% of their 
original extent. In certain areas, such as Ecuador, fores t coverage has been reduced 
by 95%. This decrease in habitat has resulted in- tens of thousands of extinctions. 
Accurately estimating the number of extinctions is impossibl e in areas like rain forests, 
where taxonomists have not even described most species. We ar e losing species -that 
we do not know exist and we are losing resources that could l ead to new medicines, 
foods, and textiles, Other causes of extinction include clim ate change, pollution, and 
invasions from foreign species. Habitats other than rain fore st—grasslands,’marshes, 
deserts, and coral reefs—are also being seriously threaten ed.
Animation 24.4: Endangeres Species
Source & Credit: TES1924. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
An endangered species is in imminent danger of extincti on throughout its range 
(where it lives). A threatened species is likely to become  endangered in the near future. 
Saving species requires more than preserving a few remn ant individuals. It requires a 
large diversity of genes within species groups to promote spe cies survival in changing 
environments. This genetic diversity requires large popula tions of plants and animals. 
Preservation of endangered species depends on a multiface ted conservation plan that 
includes the following components:
1. A global system of national parks to protect large tracts of lan d and wildlife corridors 
that allow movement between natural areas. 
2. Protected landscapes and multiple-use areas that allow contr olled private activity 
but also retain value as a wildlife habitat.
3. Zoos and botanical gardens to save species whose extinction  is imminent.
    In Pakistan. Cheetah. Tiger. Asian lion. Indian rh ino. Cheer pheasant. Crocodile and 
Gaviul have been declared extinct. While. Indus dolphin. Blackbuck, Common leopard. 
Great Indian bustard. Houbara bustard. White-headed duck and Marbled teal are 
among the animal near to extinction. 
       Deserts, Sub-mountianous tract and Wetlands are habi tats in peril. We must protect 
them rapidly. Endangered species of plants have been re corded to more than 500.
Animation 24.5: Endangeres Species
Source & Credit: Education World2024. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q1    Fill in the blanks.
1. Archaebacteria can tolerate high temperature sup to_____ _______ 
2. The irst eukaryote appeared about________ years ago. 
3. _________ presented the theory of the origin of species by means of Natural Selection.
4. ________developed a theory of natural selection essential ly identical to Darwin’s. 
5. ________are considered to be the ancestors of all life.  
6. A respiratory protein called__________is found in all  aerobic organisms. 
7. Total aggregate of genes in a population at any time is c alled its____________
8. Hardy Weinberg theorem describes a__________populati on. 
9. __________ is a series of changes in the genetic composi tion of a population over time. 
10. Level of classiication between species and family is cal led________. 
11. Hardy Weinbeig equation is binomial expansion of____ ____. 
12. An_______species is in imminent danger of extinction  throughout its range. 
13. A _______ is a localized group of individuals belong ing to the same species. 
14. The irst photosynthetic organisms used_________as source of hydrogen for 
reducing carbon dioxide to sugars.
15. ______________ published an essay on The Princip le of Population’.2124. Evolution eLearn.Punjab
1. What are hydrothermal vents? 
2. State Endosymbiont hypothesis. 
3. Deine population genetics.
4. How does fossil record provide evidence of evolution? 
5. Explain the term homology with a suitable example. 
6. What are vestigial organs? Give two examples. 
7. How are evolutionary relationships relected in DNA and protein s?
8. State Hardy Weinberg theorem. 
9. What is the diference between endangered species and th reatened species? 
10. Name any ive species, declared extinct in Pakistan.
1. What are the endangered species? What measures could be  adapted for their 
preservation? 
2. State and explain Hardy-Weinberg theorem. 
3. Describe evidences of evolution from any ive branches of biolog y. 
4. How did evolution proceed from prokaryotes to eukaryotes? Analyze  the Darwin’s 
theory of natural selection as mechanism of evolution.Q.2     Short questions.
Q.4 Extensive Questions