CHAPTER
22
 VARIATION AND
GENETICS
Animation 22:: Variation and Genetics
Source & Credit: Wikispaces222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
GENES, ALLELES AND GENE POOL
      
Hereditary characteristics pass from parents to ofspring thr ough genes in their 
gametes. Gene is the basic unit of biological information. In  fact DNA stores all sorts of 
biological information coded in the sequence of its bases in  a linear order, and genes 
are actually parts of DNA comprising its base sequences. The position of a gene on the 
chromosome is called its locus.
Genes are responsible for producing startling inherited re semblences as well as 
distinctive variations among generations. When these pass in the form of intact 
parental combination between generations, inherited similar ities are conserved; but 
when these shule, mutate or juggle with each other, variation s emerge. Genes form 
pairs on pairs of homologous chromosomes. One member of a gen e pair is located on 
one homologue, and the other member on the other homologue. Partne rs of a gene 
pair are called alleles. Each allele of a gene pair occupies the same gene locus on its 
respective homologue. Both alleles on one locus may be identic al, or diferent from 
each other. (Fig. 22.1).
Animation 22: Gene Pool
Source & Credit: GIF SOUP322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.1 Allelic pairs on a homologous pair of chromosome s422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
           
Phenotype is the form of appearance of a trait. Genotype is the  genetic complement 
i.e., the genes in an individual for a particular trait. A lower may be red or white in 
colour. Flower colour is a trait and red and white are its tw o phenotypes. Each form 
of expression is determined-by a diferent allele of the c olour gene. Allele “R” is the 
determiner for redness, while “r” is the determiner for whiteness.
GENE POOL
Any group of interbreeding organisms of the same species that exist together in 
both time and space is called a population. All the genes/ alleles found in a breeding 
population at a given time are collectively called the gene p ool. It is the total genetic 
information encoded in the total genes in a breeding populati on existing at a given 
time.
If we imagine population not as a group of individuals, but as a group of individually 
segregating and randomly assorting alleles, we can unde rstand the concept of “beanbag 
genetics”. The alleles are like beans in a beanbag. The entire beanbag full of beans is 
the gene pool of the population. In the beanbag approach we c an imagine the entire 
gene pool comprising all the alleles for all the diferent traits at once, or we can just 
focus on some subset, such as all the alleles for a singl e trait.
For convenience, we can focus on the gene pool for a single particular trait. A sample 
population of 100 diploid plants, some of which bear red low ers, others bearing white 
lowers has a sum total of 200 of all the diferent alleles ( R or r) for lower colour trait 
as its gene pool.Jumping genes do not settle peacefully on their loci, they k eep on hopping on diferent 
loci on the same chromosome or other chromosomes.522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
MENDEL ’S LAWS OF INHERITANCE
      
Gregor Johann Mendel (1822 - 1884) laid the foundation of c lassical genetics by 
formulating two laws of heredity; law of segregation and law  of independent assortment. 
He was a priest. He performed series of breeding exper iments on garden pea, Pisum 
sativum in his monastery garden for eleven years (1854 — 1 865). Pisum sativum was 
easy to cultivate and it grew well in his garden. Its lower s were hermaphrodite. It was 
normally self-fertilizing, but could also be cross-fertili zed. As the time gap between 
generations was short, Mendel could raise many generations  of pea within a short time. 
Pea had many sharply distinct traits. Each trait had two cl ear cut alternative forms or 
varieties; e.g., seed shape had a round or wrinkled phe notype, plant height was either 
tall or short, seed colour could be yellow or green. Mendel called them contrasting pair 
of a trait. He focussed on seven such pairs (Fig. 22.2).
He irst established true-breeding lines or varieties for e ach trait. A true - breeding 
variety upon self - fertilization always produced ofspring identical to the parents, 
e.g., a true breeding “round” seed plant produced only “ round” seeds. Similarly, a true 
breeding “wrinkled” seed plant produced only “wrinkled ” seeds.
After establishing 14 pure - breeding lines of seven ch aracters, he cross-fertilized 
plants that difered in one character only. The ofspring of such a cross were called 
monohybrids. He cross-fertilized a true breeding round-se eded male plant with a true 
breeding wrinkled-seeded female plant (Fig. 22.3).
Animation 22.2:Mendel’s Law of Inheritance
Source & Credit: Ms.Anderson Biology Class622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.2 Seven traits of garden pea studied by Mendel.722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
  
He called it irst parental generation (Pi). Their ofsprin g were called Fi or irst ilial 
generation. All Fi ofspring were round like one of the par ents. Wrinkled phenotype did 
not appear at all. Round dominated wrinkled. Its dominance was complete because no 
ofspring intermediate between parents was found. He calle d the trait that appeared 
in F, as dominant; while the trait, 
which was masked, as recessive.
Then Mendel allowed self-
fertilization  among F| monohybrids 
to raise F2 progeny. As a result of 
monohybrid cross 3A of F2 were 
round and lA wrinkled.
Mendel got similar results and 
the same 3:1 ratio in ofspring of 
monohybrid crosses for all the 
seven contrasting pairs of traits.
Mendel proceeded a step ahead. 
He self- fertilized F2 plants to raise 
F3. He noted that 1/3 of F2 round 
produced only round, while 2/3 
of  F2 round produced both round 
and wrinkled in . 3:1 ratio; but F1 
wrinkled produced only wrinkled. 
He concluded that 1/3 of F2 
rounds were true-breeding like Pi 
round, and 2/3 of F2 rounds were 
monohybrids like Fj round.
Fig 22.3 Mendel’scross to study single trait inheritance i n pea.822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Mendel’s Interpretations
       
Mendel proposed that each contrasting form of a trait, e.g., r oundness or wrinkledness 
of seed was determined by particulate hereditary factors, which he called ‘elementen’. 
These factors carrying hereditary information were transmi tted from parents to 
ofspring through gametes. Each pea plant had a pair of the se factors, one derived 
from male parent and the other from female parent. Both of the se factors together 
controlled expression of a trait. He designated dominant factor  with a capital letter and 
recessive factor with a small letter; e.g., R for roundness  factor and r for wrinkledness 
factor. Johannsen renamed them as ‘genes’. 
The true - breeding round seed plant of P| generation car ried ‘RR’ alleles while the 
true - breeding wrinkled seed plant of Pi carried ‘it’ alleles. When both the alleles of a 
gene pair in an organism are same, the organism is homoz ygous for that gene pair. An 
individual with a homozygous genotype is a homozygote.
Mendel inferred that the factors of a pair (alleles) sepa rated from each other during 
gamete formation so that each gamete got only one factor (allele)  for each trait. So half 
the gametes got one allele, and the other half carried the oth er allele. Fertilization 
was random. When male gamete carrying factor (R) fertili zed female gamete with factor 
(r), the complete set of the two factors (Rr) for the trait was r estored in zygote. Fig 22.4 Segregation of alleles during gamete formation922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
 
The zygote developed into Fj ofspring that was heterozygous ‘Rr ’, because the two 
alleles of its gene pair were diferent from each other. A n individual with a heterozygous 
genotype  is a heterozygote. Fi ofspring (Rr) was a monohybr id for seed shape; it was 
round in phenotype but heterozygous in genotype. Its alleles also segregated during 
gamete formation (Fig. 22.4).
Punnett square indicates that lA of F2 progeny would have be en ‘RR’ (homozygous 
round), lA + lA = Yi Rr (heterozygous round), and lA rr (wrinkled).
Mendel actually observed 3 ; 1 phenotypic ratio in F2. His  phenotypic data of F3 can 
also be explained on the basis of 1 : 2 : 1 genotypic rati o of F2. Mendel compared 
the results of all the seven separately studied characters,  and found them strikingly 
similar to formulate law of segregation.
Law of Segregation : According to law of segregation, the two coexisting alleles for 
each trait in an individual segregate (separate) from eac h other at meiosis, so that each 
gamete receives only one of the two alleles. Alleles unite a gain at random fertilization 
of  gametes when zygote is formed.
Test Cross
Mendel devised a cross called test cross, which is used to test the genotype of an 
individual showing a dominant phenotype. It is a mating in which an individual showing 
a dominant phenotype is crossed with an individual showing its recessive phenotype. 
This cross inds out the homozygous or heterozygous nature of the  genotype (Fig. 
22.5).
Animation 22: Test Cross
Source & Credit: Pinterest1022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
 Fig 22.5 Test cross of a round seedCase 1
If the seed is homozygous round(RR)  it 
will grow into a pea plant that forms all 
gametes with only `R` allele.Wrinkled 
seed plant is always homozygous 
recessive.it will form all gametes with 
`r` allele.Fertilization will result in 100% 
round seed progeny.Case 2
If the seed is heterozygous round (Rr), it
will grow into a plant that forms half the
gametes, with ‘R`and half with `r` allele.
Wrinkled seed plant will form only `r`
type of gametes. Fertilization will result
into 50% round and 50% wrinkled seed
progeny. Even a single wrinkled seed in
the  progeny is a convincing proof for
Heterozygous  nature of the round 
parent.1122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Dihybrid and Dihybrid Cross
After thoroughly studying each trait separately , Mendel de cided to study the inheritance 
of two simultaneously , e.g., seed shape and seed colour. Seed shape could be round 
or wrinkled. Similarly , seed colour could be yellow or g reen. He crossed true breeding 
round and yellow seed plants with true breeding wrinkled  and green seed plants . All F1  
dihybrid were round and yellow seeded due to dominance. Then he m ade a  dihybrid 
cross by allowing self-fertilization among F1 dihybrids. The r esults was quite surprising. 
Seeds produced as F2 progeny were ot only in the two parental combination i.e., 
round yellow and wrinkled green, but also in two new phenotypic combination
i.e., round green and wrinkled yellow. A clear cut 9:3 :3:1 phenotypic ratio was found 
in F2. Appearance of these new recombinant phenotypes of F 2 indicated that some 
sort of shuling of alleles had occurred during gemete form ation. Mendel inferred 
the mechanism of this shuling as  independent assortment of alleles into gametes. 
He concluded that the alleles for seed shape and colour we re not bound to remain in 
parental combination forever, i.e., ‘R’ with ‘Y’ and ‘r’ w ith ‘y’ ;rather these were free to 
assort independently . R could go with Y or y in any gamete  with equal change.
Animation 22: Dihyrid Cross
Source & Credit: GIF SOUP1222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Similarly, r could go with y or Y in any gamete with equa l probability. Four types of 
gametes, i.e., RY, Ry, rY and ry were formed in equal  number in a perfect ratio of 1:1 
: 1:1. When these gametes randomly fertilized each other,  a 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio 
was produced among F2 progeny (Fig 22.6).
Mendel formulated Law of Independent Assortment : “When two contrasting pairs of 
traits are followed in the same cross, their alleles assort independently into gametes.” 
Alleles of one pair inherit independently of alleles of th e other pair. The distribution of 
alleles of one trait into gametes has no inluence on the distr ibution of alleles of the 
other trait. Thus the chance for a plant to be round or wrinkl ed is independent of its 
chance of being yellow or green.
Probability  is the chance of an event to occur. Inheritance of seed sha pe is an 
independent event. In F2 ofspring of a monohybrid cross the independent chance 
for a seed to be round is 3/4 , or it to be wrinkled is 1/4 . Inheritance of seed colour is 
another separate event. The independent chance in F2 of a monohybrid cross for a seed 
to he vellow is 3/4 or it to be green is 1/4. When two indepe ndent  events are occunng 
simultaneously like m Dihybrid cross, the ratio of each join t phenotypic combination 
can be obtained by multiplying the probabilities of individ ual phenotypes. It is called 
product rule.
The joint probability that both of the independent events will oc cur simultaneously, is 
equal to the product of individual probabilities of each event.
Animation 22: Product Rule
Source & Credit:1322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.6 Dihybrid cross produces parental as well as recomina nt types.1422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Event No. 1 Event No. 2  Both events at a time
Seed shape Seed colour Seed shape and colour
Independent probability to 
be:Independent probability to 
be:Joint probability to be:
Round =
Round = 
Wrinkled =
Wrinkled =yellow = 
 green = 
yellow = 
green = Round yellow =9/16 
Round green =  x  = 3/16 
Wrinkled yellow =  x  = 3/16 
Wrinkled green =
Genes are located at speciic loci on chromosomes. Independen t assortment of genes 
depends upon independent assortment of their chromosomes. All  the genes present 
on a homologous pair of chromosomes are linked to each other in the form of a linkage 
group. These cannot assort independently. Those traits assort independently whose 
alleles are riding non homologous chromosomes. Pea has seven  homologous pairs 
of chromosomes. Mendel knew nothing about chromosomes. The trai ts he studied 
were conined to only four chromosomes. He reported independen t assortment of 
those traits whose genes were either on diferent homologous chr omosomes, or were 
so far away from each other on the same chromosome that they ap peared to assort 
independently due to crossing over.
Mendel presented his indings to Brunn Society for the study  of Natural Science in 
1865. His work was published in the proceedings of the s ociety in 1866. That laid the 
foundation of classical genetics. His work lay neglected f or 34 years. In 1900, 16 years 
after his death, three botanists; Correns, De Varies and Ts chermach independently 
rediscovered and acknowledged his work.1522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
 
Activity:   Normal individuals have melanin pigment in their skin, h air and eyes. Albinos 
totally lack pigment in their bodies. Albinism is a reces sive trait in humans. Two normal 
parents have an albino child. What is the probability that th eir next child will also be an 
albino?
DOMINANCE  RELATIONS
Dominance is a physiological efect of an allele over its par tner allele on the same gene 
locus. There are four types of dominance relations among al leles, each indicating a 
diferent style of their functional efect upon each other.
    1.Complete dominance        2.Incomplete dominance
    3.Cociominance                     4. Over dominanc e
Complete  Dominance
When one allele (R) is completely dominant over the other (r) , presence of the recessive 
allele is functionally hidden, so the heterozygote (Rr) has  the same round phenotype 
as (RR) homozygote.
The contrasting pairs of alleles for all the seven characte rs chosen by Mendel showed 
complete dominance. After Mendel, further breeding exper iments were carried out 
on diferent plants and animals. Many novel phenotypes and phenotypic rat tios were 
observed that could not be explained on the basis of complete d ominance.
Incomplete Dominance
In 1899 Carl Correns was working on a lowering plant nam ed 4 O’clock. When he 
crossed a true breeding fed lowered plant with a true bre eding white lowered 4 O’clock, 
all the F] hybrids had pink lowers. This new phenotype had a shade intermediate 
between those of the parents due to an intermediate amount of pi gment in petals. 
When Correns self-fertilized Fi pink, the F2 showed all  three phenotypes of lowers’in 
the ratio of 1 red : 2 pink : 1 white. Red was homozygous f or red alleles, and white was 
homozygous for white alleles. But when allele for red and allele for white were present 
together in the same plant, neither of them masked the efect of other; rather these 
alleles showed incomplete dominance in the form of pink col our.1622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.7 Incomplete dominance in 4 O’ clock1722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
When the phenotype of the heterozygote is intermediate between phenotypes of the 
two homozygotes, it is called incomplete or partial dominance.
As there is no truly dominant allele, the usual capital an d small letter distinction for 
dominant and recessive trait is not necessary. Both the allel es are represented by the 
same letter ‘R’ but are numbered diferently to distinguish  white from red. Allele for 
red is designated as R|, and the allele for white as R2  (Fig. 22.7).
Punnett square indicates that the phenotypic ratio is the same  as the genotypic ratio. 
There is absolutely no need of a test cross. Do these results make Mendel’s principles 
invalid? The lower colour does show blending at phenotypic l evel in Fi, which is quite 
contrary to what Mendel observed. But the re-appearance of re d and white lowers in 
F2 conirms that blending does not occur at genetic level.
Codominance
   
The phenotype of heterozygote is distinct in quality from those of the two homozygotes. 
It is not an intermediate quantitative expression like incompl ete dominance. Each allele 
of the gene pair is associated with a diferent substance, e.g.,
    
Codominance occurs when both the alleless express indepen dently in heterozygote; 
(A|A2) and form their respective products X and Y. The cod ominant heterozygote 
would have both substances at the same time.
Diferent alleles of a gene that are both expressed in a he terozygous condition are 
called codominant.Produces
1
Produces
2Allele A   Substance X
Allele A   Substance Y →
 →1822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
MN BLOOD TYPE OR BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM
Human blood groups can be of many types, e.g. ABO, MN, M NSs, Rh ete. Landsteiner 
and Levine discovered MN blood types in man on the basis of speciic antigens present 
on RBC. These RBC antigens induce production of their spec iic antibodies. There are 
three general phenotypes; M,N  and MN. M phenotype has a ntigen M which is produced 
by gene LM. N phenotype has antigen N that is produced by  its allele LN. MN phenotype 
has both M and N antigens, simultaneously produced by thei r alleles LM and LN
Phenotvoe Genotype  Antieens on RBC
M lMlMM
N lN lNN
MN lMlNM and N
If a man of M blood group marries a woman of N blood group, all their children will 
have MN blood group (Fig. 22.8)
Animation 22:  Blood Group System
Source & Credit: waynesword.palomar1922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.8 Codominance in MN Blood group alleles.
Over Dominance
This dominance relation is fascinating because the over dom inant heterozygote exceeds 
in quantity the phenotypic expression of both the homozygotes. In  fruit ly Drosophila 
the heterozygote (w+ / w) has more quantity of luorescent pigm ents in eyes than wild 
(w+ / w+) o r white eye (w / w) homozygotes.
MULTIPLE ALLELES
     
Gene mutations may produce many diferent alleles of a gene . Some genes may have 
as many as 300 alleles. All such altered alternative for ms of a gene, whose number 
is more than two, are called multiple alleles. Any two of th ese multiple alleles can be 
present in the genome of a diploid organism, but a haploid organism or a gamete can 
have just one of them in its genome.2022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
ABO - The First Discovered Multiple Allelic Blood Group  System in Man
ABO blood group system was discovered by Karl Landsteiner in 1901. ABO system has 
four diferent phenotypes which are distinct from each other on the basis of specic 
antigens on the surface of RBC. A person having antigen A has blood group A; a person 
having antigen B has blood group B; a person having both the antigens A and B has 
blood group AB; but a person having neither antigen A nor B would have blood group 
O.
Bernstein explained the genetic basis of ABO system in 1 925. This blood group system 
is encoded by a single polymorphic gene I on chromosome 9.  It has three multiple 
alleles IA, IB, and i.
Allele IA speciies production of antigen A, and allele I B speciies production of antigen 
B, but allele i does not specify any antigen. Their domin ance relations are interesting 
too. Alleles IA and IB are codominant to each other, because each expresses equally 
in IA IB heterozygote to produce AB phenotype. But allele i i s recessive to both IA and 
IB. Therefore IA IA or IAi genotypes will produce phenotyp e A. Similarly IB IB or IBi 
produces phenotype B. The homozygous ii will produce phenoty pe O.2122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
 
The blood group alleles start their expression at early emb ryonic stage and keep on 
expressing themselves till death. Therefore the blood group phenotype of a person 
never changes throughout life.
Anti-A and anti-B antibodies appear in plasma during the  irst few months after birth. 
They are naturally occuring in the absence of correspondi ng antigen. The blood serum 
of A phenotype contains anti-B antibodies. They will aggluti nate7or clump any RBC 
which have B antigens on them. B phenotype contains anti-A a ntibodies in the serum 
and agglutinate any RBC with antigen A. Phenotype AB has neither anti-A nor anti-B 
antibodies in the serum. The serum of O blood type contains both anti-A and anti-B 
antibodies. The blood serum containing anti-bodies is calle d antiserum.
Any blood transfusion is ideally safe if it does not cause agglutination in the recipient. 
Agglutination leads to serious results because clumped cel ls cannot pass through ine 
capillaries. The blood samples of the donor and the recipi ent are cross  matched for 
compatibility before giving transfusion. If incompatible blood  is transfused, dangerous 
hemolytic reaction occurs. Either the antibodies of the recipi ent destroy the RBC of 
donor or the antibodies of the donor hemolyze the RBC of the reci pient.
Blood group A can be transfused only into A and AB recipie nts because they do 
not have anti - A antibodies. Blood group B can be transfused  only into B and AB 
recipients as they do not have anti - B antibodies. AB blood c an be transfused only into 
AB recipients because they have neither anti - A, nor anti  B antibodies. O blood has 
neither A nor B antigen, but it does have anti - A and anti- B antibodies. An O recipient 
can only be given tranfusion from a donor O. Phenotype O can  also be used as donor 
for small transfusions to A, B and AB recipients because donor’s antibodies are quickly 
absorbed by other tissues or greatly diluted in the recipie nt’s blood stream. O blood 
group individuals are called universal donors. AB blood gr oup individuals are called 
universal recipients because they can receive transfusion s of blood from any of the 
four blood groups.
 
 A and B antigens can also be present in saliva and other  body luids of some persons 
called secretors. Secretors have dominant secretor gene “Se”  on chromosome 19.2222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
     
Genetic analysis on the basis of blood groups helps in solvin g cases of disputed 
parentage. It can only be used to prove that an individual is  not the parent of a particular 
child, e.g. a child of AB phenotype (IA IB) can not be th e child of a parent of phenotype 
O (ii). Similarly a man of B phenotype cannot be father of  a blood type A child, whose 
mother is of phenotype O. His father could either be A or AB  phenotype.
 
Activity :    Two new born babies get mixed up in the nursery of a hosp ital. Baby I is. 
type B and  baby II is of type O. Determine their parentag e from the phenotypes of 
these two couples. Mr. Haris is type A and Mrs. Haris is  type AB. Mr. and Mrs. Bilal are 
both of type A.
Rh Blood Group System
    
ABO blood type is further diferentiated by a + or - sign. This positive or negative sign 
refers to the presence or absence of another blood group syste m antigen called Rh 
factor. Rh blood group system is deined on the basis of Rh factor  present on the 
surface of RBC. This system is named Rh after Rhesus m onkey, because its antigen was 
irst discovered in it by Landsteiner in 1930s.
Rh blood group system is encoded by three genes C, D and E , which occupy two tightly 
linked loci. Alleles of gene D occupy one locus called loc us D, while genes C and E 
alternatively occupy the other locus. The D locus is of prime importance.
Gene D has two alleles, D and d. D is completely dominant over d. Persons having 
genotype DD or Dd have Rh factor on their RBC and are Rh+. Per sons with genotype 
dd do not have Rh factor and are Rh-. Unlike the naturally oc curing anti - A and anti - 
B antibodies of ABO system, anti - Rh antibody production req uires a stimulus by the 
human Rh antigen itself. An Rh- person does not produce an ti - Rh antibodies unless 
he is exposed to Rh antigen. Rh+ donor is totally incompatible  for Rh- recipient. If an 
Rh- person receives Rh antigen through wrong Rh+ blood trans fusion, he will begin 
to produce anti - Rh antibodies against Rh antigens. Rh- bl ood, clear of any anti - Rh 
antibody from a donor who has never been exposed to Rh antigen  can be transfused 
to Rh+ recipient.2322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Erythroblastosis foetalis : Maternal-foetal Rh incompatibility Maternal-foetal 
incompatibility results when an Rh- woman, married to an R h+ man conceives a child 
who is Rh+. If the man’s genotype is DD, all of their ofspri ng (Dd) will be Rh+. If the 
man’s genotype is Dd, half of their ofspring with Dd genotype  will be Rh+. If RBC of 
Rh+ foetus cross the placental barrier and enter into Rh- m other’s blood stream, the 
mother’s immune system reacts to the foetal Rh antigen stimulu s by producing a large 
number of anti - Rh antibodies. When mother’s anti - Rh an tibodies seep through 
placenta into blood circulation of foetus, they start hemolysis ( break down / bursting) 
of RBC of foetus. As this destruction continues, the foetus becom es anaemic. The 
anaemic  foetus starts to release many -immature erythroblasts into his blood stream. 
That is why this hemolytic disease of the new bom is calle d erythroblastosis foetalis. 
This anaemia may lead to .abortion or still birth. Even if th e pregnancy continues, 
the liver and spleen of the foetus swell as they rapidly p roduce RBC. The breakdown 
product of RBC called bilirubin also accumulates in the f oetus. Bilirubin damages his 
brain cells and turns his skin and whites of the eye ye llow. This condition is jaundice. 
So the baby if born alive, sufer from severe hemolytic anae mia and jaundice. Such 
baby’s blood should be immediately replaced by Rh” blood free of anti - Rh antibodies.
The irst Rh incompatible pregnancy may not face much prob lems if very few of foetal 
antigens cross placenta into maternal circulation and the am ount of maternal antibody 
production is not very high. But when placenta detaches at bi rth, a large number of 
foetal cells enter mother’s blood stream and stimulate producti on of large amount of 
anti - Rh antibodies by the mother. These anti - Rh antibodi es persist in mother’s blood 
for a long time and are persistent risk for the next Rh+ foe tus. Rh sensitization of Rh’ 
mother is avoided by a simple therapy. She is given an in jection of Rh antiserum during 
early pregnancy and immediately after birth. The Rh - antibodies in the Rh antiserum 
will destroy Rh+ RBC of the foetus before they stimulate produ ction of maternal anti - 
Rh antibodies. The injected antiserum disappears before the next pregnancy
Sometimes a mild ABO incompatibility protects the baby again st a more severe Rh 
incompatibility. If O’ mother conceives A+ or B+ baby, any^ foetal A or B type RBC 
entering the mother’s blood are quickly destroyed by her an ti - A or anti - B antibodies, 
before she can form anti - Rh antibodies.2422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Activity:   An Rh” woman is married to an Rh+ man whose father was also Rh”. What is 
the probable risk of erythroblastosis foetalis in their babie s?
EPISTASIS
When an efect caused by a gene or gene pair at one locus  interferes with or hides the 
efect caused by another gene or gene pair at another locus,  such a phenomenon of 
gene interaction is called epistasis. Epistasis must not be  confused with dominance. 
Dominance is the relationship between alleles of the same g ene occupying the same 
locus, but epistasis is the interaction between diferent gen es occupying diferent loci.
Bombay Phenotype
The expression of-ABO blood type antigens by IA or IB gene  depends upon the presence 
of another gene H. ABO locus is on chromosome 9, while H loc us is on chromosome 
19. H gene changes a precursor substance into substance H. It produces an enzyme 
that inserts a sugar onto a precussor glycoprotein on the Surfa ce of RBC. Only then 
antigen A or antigen B speciied by IA or I gene could atta ch to this sugar of substance 
H. The recessive allele h cannot insert sugar molecule to glycoprotein. Therefore, hh 
individuals lack the site of attachment for antigen A pr anti gen B. Thus A and B antigens 
cannot adhere to their RBC and fall away. Their RBC lack  A and B antigens although they 
do not lack IA and IB genes. They are phenotypically lik e O, but are not genotypically O. 
Their phenotype is called Bombay phenotype (Fig. 22.9).
Activity : A student, of biology learns about ABO blood types. He knows  that he’is type 
O, and his father is type A and mother is type AB. He won ders how his blood type could 
have arisen. Suggest how type A and AB parents could produ ce a child of blood type O.
PLEIOTROPY
When a single gene afects two or more traits, the phenomenon is called pleiotropy. 
Such a gene with multiple phenotypic efect is called pleiotropic.
Examples:2522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
1. White eye gene in Drosophila also afects the shape of sp erm storing organs 
(spermathecae).
2. Genes that afect growth rate in humans also inluence both weight and height.
3. In cats, the dominant allele W not only makes fur pure white but also causes deafness. 
In ww homozygous normal pigmented cats, melanocytes produce pigment of fur 
and also contribute to ‘hair cells in inner ear that sense sound.
When a cat gets W allele, its melanocytes fail to develop pr operly. Melanocyte failure 
causes both phenotypes, i.e. white fur and deafness.
CONTINUOUSL Y VARYING TRAITS
Genotype interacts with environment to produce phenotype. Phenotypi c expression 
of traits has two aspects:
 (i) Qualitative             
(ji) Quantitative
Qualitative diferences are large and more obvious, but quan titiave variations are small 
and less striking. Some traits, like pea seed shape, sh ow discontinuous qualitative 
variations with two sharply distinct phenotypes, round or wrink led; others like 4 O’clock 
lower colour can have three phenotypes, red, pink and white ; still others like ABO 
blood group system have four qualitatively diferent phenotypes A, B, AB and O. But 
many traits like height, weight, intelligence and skin c olour in humans, and grain colour 
in wheat exibit continuous quantitative variation over a range of many phenotypes.
endel focused on traits that showed only two qualitatively difer ent phenotypes which 
could be determined by just two alternate alleles of a sing le gene. Darwin observed small 
continuous variations within individuals of a population. Such a range of phenotypic 
spectrum of a trait cannot be traced to a single gene with two alleles. Even a few multiple 
alleles of a single gene cannot make such a wide range  of phenotypes.2622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.9 Bombay phenotype results from epistasis2722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
        
MA continuously varying trait is encoded by alleles of two or more diferent gene 
pairs found at diferent loci, all inluencing the same tra it in an additive way. These 
quantitative traits, are called polygenic traits,  and their genes are polygenes.  Each 
polygene has a small positive or negative efect on the charac ter. Polygenes supplement 
each other and sum of positive and negative efects of all ind ividual polygenes produce 
quantitative phenotypes of a continuously Varying trait.
Wheat grains vary in colour from white to dark red. This tra it shows a continuous 
spectrum of colour variation. (Fig 22-10). Some grains are white, some are deep red but 
most grains have shades in between from light pink to modera tely dark red. Nilsson 
- Ehle studied the genetics of wheat grain colour. When he  crossed a true breeding 
dark red grain plant with a true breeding white grain p lant, all Fi grains had light red 
colour, intermediate between two parental shades. It seemed as if it was a case of 
incomplete dominance. But when Fi.grains were grown to matu re plants and crossed 
with each other, F2 grains had exactly seven shades of col our in the ratio of 1 dark red 
: 6 moderately dark red : 15 red : 20 light red : 15 p ink : 6 light pink : 1 white (Fig. 22-11).
Fig 22.10 Colour variation in wheat grains is a polygenic trait s.2822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Three diferent gene pairs, i.e. Aa, Bb, Cc at three di ferent loci contribute to the wheat 
grain colour. Each individual would contain six alleles f or the trait. Alleles A, B and C 
code for an equal amount (dose) of red pigment, which is a  positive efect. But none 
of a, b and c encode red pigment, which is a no (zero) d ose negative efect. If all the six 
alleles code for red pigment (AABBCC), the grain is dar k red; when none of the six alleles 
encode red pigment (aabbcc), the grain is white. When a  grain has one allele for red 
pigment (Aabbcc or aaBbcc or aabbCc) its colour is light p ink; if it has two alleles for the 
pigment (AaBbcc or aaBbCc or AabbCc) it is pink, if it h as three pigment alleles (AaBbCc 
or AABbcc or AabbCC), it will be light red. Similarly f our alleles colour dose (AABBcc or 
aaBBCC or AAbbCC) will make red and ive alleles colour dose (AABBCc or AABbCC or 
AaBBCC) will produce moderately dark red grain. Thus th e colour phenotype of the 
grain is the sum of the individual efects of all the six a lleles.Environmental factors like 
light, water and nutrients also inluence the amount of grain  colour. Environmental 
variations make the distribution of phenotypes more smooth and con tinuous.
    
Human skin colour is also a quantitative trait which is contr olled by three to six gene 
pairs. The greater the number of pigment specifying gen es, the darker the skin. A child 
can have darker or lighter skin than his parents.
Human height is a more complex polygenic trait. The perfe ctly continuous variation 
in range of human heights produces a smooth bell - shaped  curve (Fig 22-12). A few 
people are very tall or very short, but most individuals fall in the average or mean 
value. This trait is controlled by many pairs of genes at d iferent loci. Even multiple 
alleles may be possible at each locus. More the number of  alleles for shortness, the 
shorter the height will be. Similarly greater the number of alleles for tallness, the taller2922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.11 Number of pigment - contributing alleles in F23022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig.22.12-Human hight is a continously varying trait3122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
the height will be. Environment also has a strong inluence on height, intelligence and 
skin colour in humans. Constant exposure to sun darkens ski n. Poor nutrition prevents 
achieving genetically determined height. Healthy and enc ouraging social environment 
promotes intellegence.
Activity : Study continuous variations in height and discontinuous variation  in tongue 
rolling ability Of man and record your observations as histog rams.
Frequency histograms illustrate variations. A frequency hi stogram is a simple graph. 
The horizontal or X axis indicates the range of diferent ph enotypes of a trait within a 
population. The vertical or Y axis indicates the number of i ndividuals or their percentage 
in the population.
Some people can roll their tongue into a distinct U 
shape when they extend it out of their mouth. They are 
called rollers (Fig 22.13). This ability is due to a si ngle 
dominant gene. It is a discontinous variation inherited 
in simple Mendelian fashion. Its frequency diagram 
forms asymmetric distribution curve, with much greater 
frequency of phenotypes at one end than at the other.
Human height is a continuously varying trait. If we plot a f requency diagram of heights 
of humans in a large population, so many phenotypes are fou nd with categories 
blending into one another. It forms a smooth bell shaped norma l distribution curve. 
Measure the heights of a fairly large number of students in your college in cms, each 
to the nearest centimeter. Also note the ability of each student as roller or non roller. 
Record your observation in a table like this.
Sr.NO Name Height in cm Roller/ Non-Roler3222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.14 Comparison of a continuous and a discontineous variat ion in human3322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Representing each measurement class as a bar with its h eight proportional to the 
number of individuals in each class, plot the graph (Fig  22-14).
GENE LINKAGE
Every organism possesses numerous characters controlled by thousands of genes, 
but the number of chromosomes is limited. .Therefore, each chromosome must carry 
many genes on it. All the genes located on the same chromosom e are linked to each 
other. This phenomenon of staying together of all the genes of a chromosome is called 
linkage. Gene linkage is a physical relationship betwee n genes. A chromosome carries 
its linked genes en bloc in the form of a linkage group.  The number of linkage groups 
corresponds to the number of homologous pairs of chromosomes. Man  has 23 linkage 
groups. Genes for colour blindness, haemophilia, gout etc for m one linkage group on 
human X - chromosome. Similarly, gene for sickle cell a naemia, leukemia and albinism 
make another linkage group on human chromosome 11. Linked genes whose loci are 
close to each other do not obey Mendel’s law of independent as sortment, because 
these cannot assort independently during meiosis. Gene link age also minimizes the 
chances of genetic recombination and variations among ofsprin g.
Animation 22: Gene Linkage
Source & Credit: Point Pleasant Beach High School3422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
CROSSING OVER
Linked genes can be separated by crossing over. Closer th e two gene loci, more 
strongly are their genes linked. The farther apart two gen es lie, greater are chances 
of their separation through crossing over. Crossing over is an exchange of segments 
between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes during meiosis.’ Let 
us visualize crossing over by considering only one pair of homologous chromosome 
(Fig. 22-16). The homologous chromosomes pair up lengthwise , point to point and 
locus to locus. One homologue carries genes ‘A’ and ‘B \ th e other homologue has 
‘a’ with ‘b’. Chiasmata are formed at many places betwee n non-sister chromatids of 
homologous chromosomes. Crossing over occurs at 4 strand stage be tween non-sister 
chromatids. It may take place at more than one place along a  chromosome. Exchange of 
chromosome segments logically means exchange of DNA, i.e. genes or alleles. As alleles 
of non-sister chromatids are diferent, an exchange between  their segments results in 
recombination of genes. Allele ‘b’ crosses over to homologue con taining allele ‘A’; and 
allele ‘B’ comes on the homologue of ‘a’. Then homologous chrom osomes separate 
by opening up chiasmata. The sister chromatids also separ ate from each other and 
each becomes an independent chromosome to move singly in eac h of the four haploid 
gametes. Four types of gametes are formed; two with parental combinations of linked 
genes, i.e. AB and ab, and two with recombination of genes , i.e. Ab and aB. If crossing 
over does not occur, only the two parental types of gametes are f ormed. Parental 
types of gametes produce parental types of ofspring, while recombination gametes 
produce recombinant types of ofspring.
Animation 22: Crossing Over
Source & Credit: GIF SOUP3522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.16 Crossing over recombine genes.
Recombination typesRecombination frequency = 100Sum of all combinations×3622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Cross Over or Recombination Frequency
It is the proportion of recombinant types between two gene pairs  as compared to the 
sum of all combinations.
The recombination frequencies between two linked genes ca n be calculated by 
backcrossing the heterozygote to a homozygous double recessive ( Fig. 22-17).
Fig 22.17 Recombination frequency between two linked genes .3722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
      
The recombination frequency is directly 
proportional to the distance between the 
linked gene loci. Genes can be mapped 
on a chromosome on the basis of their 
recombination frequencies. If 1% of 
recombination frequency is equal to 1 unit 
map distance, the two linked genes A and B 
with a 20% recombination frequency must 
be 20 units apart.
Crossing over produces genetic variations 
among ofspring. Genetic variations lead to tremendous variations in their traits. 
Variations provide raw material for evolution by letting them ad apt successfully to the 
changing environment.
 SEX DETERMINATION 
Sex Chromosomes
The search for mechanism of inheritance of sex started af ter discovery of Mendel’s 
wlork in 1900. A clear picture of the genetic basis of se x determination emerged after 
the discovery of sex chromosomes.
The fruit ly, Drosophila melanogaster has eight chromosomes i n the form of four 
homologous pairs. T.H. Morgan (1911) noticed a peculiar di ference in the chromosomes 
of male and female Drosophila (Fig 22-18). The chromosomes  of the three homologous 
pairs were similar in both of the sexes, but the fourth pai r was very diferent. The 
female had two similar rod shaped X-chromosomes in the four th pair, while the male 
had one rod shaped X-chromosome but the other a morphologically  diferent, J-shaped 
Y chromosome in the fourth heteromorphic pair. X and Y chromos omes are called sex- 
chromosomes because these have genes for determination of sex . Chromosomes of 
the other three pairs are autosomes. All chromosomes other than sex-chromosomes 
are called autosomes. Autosomes do not carry any sex determin ing gene.3822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.18 Chromosomed of    and    Dorsophila melanogaster.3922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
     
Humans have 46 chromosomes in the form of 23 pairs. 22 pai rs are of autosomes 
and one pair is of sex-chromosomes. Autosome pairs are common  in both the sexes 
but the 23 rd sex chromosome, pair is very diferent in mal es and females (Fig. 22-
19). A woman has two similar X chromosomes in her 23rd pa ir but a man has an X 
chromosome along with a much shorter Y chromosome in his 23rd  pair. The 23rd pair 
in man is heteromorphic. She is XX but he is XY.
 
SRY is the male determining gene. It is located at the tip of short arm of Y-chromosome. 
Its name SRY stands for “Sex determining regions of Y.”
Fig 22.19 Sex Chromosomes of a man4022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
In some grasshoppers males and females have diferent nu mber of chromosomes. 
The female has 24 chromosomes in the form of 11 pairs of a utosomes and a pair of 
X chromosomes. But the male grasshopper has 23 chromosomes. He has 11 pairs of 
autosomes and only one X chromosome. The other member for sex chromosome pair 
is entirely missing in male. Thus male is XO and fem ale is XX.
Patterns of Sex Determination
There is a wide variety of sex determining ‘ mechanisms  but three patterns are more, 
pommon.
1. XO - XX Type  This pattern of sex determination is found Tn grasshopper and Pr otenor bug. Male 
is XO because it has only one X chromosome. The other sex chromosome i s missing entirely. Male 
is heterogametic because. it forms t\yp I types of sperms; half the sperms have X ‘ chromosome 
while the othher half are without any sex chromosome. A gamefe wtihout any sex chromosome is 
called nullo geamete.
Female is XX, because it has two X -chromosomes. It is homog ametic, it forms only 
one type of eggs. Every egg carries an X chromosome. Sex of  the ofspring depends on 
the kind of sperm that fertilizes the egg. If an X-carryi ng sperm fertilizes the egg, an XX 
female ofspring is produced. If the nubo
sperm fertilizes the egg, an XO male ofspring is produc ed (Fig. 22-20). Sex ratio between 
male and female ofspring is 1:1.Some species have compound sex chromosomes. They maintain m any X or Y or both 
XY chromosomes of more than one kind that act together as a sing le sex- determining 
group. That is why the diference in number of chromosomes between male and female 
is very large. In the round worm Ascaris incurva, the fem ale has 42 chromosomes in the 
form of 8 pairs of compound X along with 13 pairs of autosomes  (16+26). Its male has 
35 chromosomes comprising 8X plus one Y alongwith 13 pairs  of auto some (8+1+26).4122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
    
   
Fig 22.20 Sex determination in grass hopper and Protenor bug.
  
2.    XY-XX Type :  This pattern of sex determination is found in Drosophila, man  and many 
other organisms. Male is XY and female is XX. Male bei ng heterogametic produces two 
types of sex-determining sperms. Half the sperms carry X-chromosome and the other 
half carry Y - chromosome. Chances for both types of sperms  are equal.
Female being homogametic produces only one type of eggs, ea ch with an X chromosome. 
Sex of the ofspring is determined by the type of sperm. If  an X - carrying sperm fertilizes 
the egg, the zygote will be XX, and a female ofspring is  produced. If a Y - carrying sperm 
fertilizes the egg, the zygote will be XY, and a male ofs pring will be produced. The sex-
ratio between male and female ofspring is 1:1. Sex ratio indicates chances of the sex 
of the ofspring. Chances for a son or daughter in human bi rth are equal (Fig. 22.21).4222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.21 Sex Determination in man and Drosp
  
3.     ZZ - ZW Type : This type of sex - determination pattern is common in birds,  
butterlies and moths. It was discovered by J. Seiler in 19 14 in moth. It is the reverse 
of XY - XX system. Here the female is heterogametic ZW bu t the male is homogametic 
ZZ. Female produces two kinds of eggs Z and W in equal proportions. All sperms are 
alike, each carrying a Z - chromosome. It is the kind of egg that determines the sex 
of ofspring. When a Z - carrying egg is fertilized by the sperm, a male ofspring is 
produced, but when a W - carrying egg is fertilized by  the sperm a female ofspring is 
produced. Sex ratio is 1:1 (Fig. 22.22).4322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.22 Sex determination in birds and butterlies.
Comparison of chromosomal determination of sex 
between  Drosophila and Humans
Although both Drosophila and humans follow the same XY - XX s ex determining 
pattern, yet there is a basic technical diference between  the two. Presence of ‘SRY’ 
gene on Y chromosome is essential for triggering the developm ent of maleness in 
humans. Absence of Y chromosome simply leads to the female  development path. XO 
Turner’s syndrome in humans produced through non-disjunc tion is a sterile female. 
But in Drosophila XO is a sterile male. Similarly XXY in dividual produced through non 
disjunctional gametes in humans is a sterile male calle d Klinefelter’s syndrome, but the 
same XXY set of chromosomes in Drosophila  produces a fertile female (Fig. 22-23).
Fig 22.23 Comparison of sex determination in man and Dorsophilia4422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
 
 There is a close genic balance between genes of di ferent chromosomes. Drosophila 
has an X chromosome-autosome balance system. Its Y c hromosome appears  to have 
very little inluence on sex. Here actually the X chrom osome is female determining and 
the autosomes are male determining. Sex of an indivi dual depends more on the number 
of X chromosomes relative to the number of sets of a utosomes. An X : A ratio of 1.00 or 
higher produces female whereas an X : A ratio of 0. 5 or lower produces males.
Sex Determination in Plants
Plants show a variety of sexual situations. Some species lik e Ginkgo are dioecious having 
plants of separate sexes. Male plants produce lowers with only stamens and female 
plants produce lowers with only carpels. Some dioecious pla nts have a diference 
of sex chromosomes between the sexes. These have an X - Y system. These plants 
typically exhibit an X - chromosome - autosome balance syste m for sex determination. 
Many other sex - determining mechanisms are also seen i n dioecious plants. Correns 
(1907) discovered that pollens of certain plants were sex -  determining. All eggs are of 
one type.  Pollens of the two types are produced in equal nu mber. One kind of pollen 
after fertilizing the egg produces male plant whereas the  other kind of pollen after 
fertilization produces female plant (Fig. 
22-24).
Many species of eukaryotic micro  
organisms like yeast do not have sex 
chromosome. These depend on genic 
system for determination of sex. In this 
system the sexes are speciied by simple 
allelic diferences at a small number of 
gene loci e.g., a and a are the two mating 
types (sexes) of yeast, controlled by MAT 
a and MAT a alleles respectively.
Fig 22.24 Pollens determines Sex4522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
SEX LINKAGE 
Sex Linkage in Drosophila
Thomas Hunt Morgan (1910) provided experimental evidence i n support of chromosomal 
theory of heredity through discovery of sex linkage in fruitl y Drosophila.
                                                                                                    
   
 
Morgan raised cultures of Drosophila lies to study diferent tr aits, such as colour of 
the eye. Normal fruit lies, the wild type, have bright red  eyes. One of his coworkers 
Calvin Bridges, observed an unusual white eye mutant male  ly. (Fig. 22.25).Drosophila is a very useful organism for genetic studies for  many reasons: * 
1. The tiny ly is often seen hovering over rotten fruits. It ca n be easily collected and 
cultured on mashed banana and other fruits. It does not need  large spacious cages. 
It lives happily in ordinary glass bottle of jams and marm alades. It eats yeast that 
grows on mashed banana.
2. Male and female Drosophila show sexual dimorphism i.e . these are morphologically 
distinct from each other. Male is smaller in size with bl ack rounded abdomen. Female 
is larger with pointed abdomen. Male has sex combs on fron t legs.
3. Drosophila has a generation time of just two weeks. It lays  a large number of eggs 
which hatch out into fertile ofspring. Many generations can be raised in a relatively 
short time.
4. 4. Drosophila is perfectly suited for genetic studies. I t shows fairly large number of 
distinct contrasting traits. Morgan and his colleagues studie d pattern of inheritance 
of more than 85 traits of Drosophila. Its larvae are excellent material for dissection 
for chromosome study. It has only eight chromosomes in four homol ogous pairs 
that can be conveniently studied under a microscope. Its sal ivary gland cells have 
giant chromosomes in their nuclei. These giant chromosomes h ave characteristic 
banding patterns corresponding to genes.
5. 5. The entire genome of Drosophila has been successful ly sequenced as part of 
human genome project.4622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.25 Wild type red eyed female and mutant white ey ed male Dorsophilia
 Morgan mated this white eyed male with a wild type red e yed female. All 1237 ofspring 
of this cross had red eyes. Morgan concluded that red eye is a dominant trait (Fig 22-
26a).
Morgan allowed males and females of F( generation to mate a nd produce F2 generation. 
He counted 2459 red-eyed females, 1,011 red-eyed male s and 782 white eye males 
among F2 (Fig. 22.26b).
The proportion of 3470 red eyed to 782 white eyed lies did not perfectly it into 
Mendelian 3 : 1 ratio. The number of recessive phenotype individuals was too small. 
There was another pecularity in this result. All the white -eyed lies were only males. 
There was no white eye female in F2 generation.4722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
  
  
The inheritance of eye colour some how seemed to be related to the ‘sex’ of the 
ofspring. Morgan proposed that:
(i)     The gene for eye colour is located on X chromosome, (ii) the alleles for eye colour 
are present only on X chromosome. There is no corresponding allele for this trait on Y 
chromosome.
Thus even a single recessive allele on X chromosome can e xpress itself in males because 
Y chromosome is empty for that gene. Males are hemizygous a s they carry just one 
allele on their only X chromosome. Females have two X’chromosom es, each carrying 
an allele of the trait. Females can be homozygous or heterozy gous.
Symbol “w” represents the recessive allele for white eye,  and “w+” designates its wild 
type allele for red eye. The genotypes of the parents of Pi  cross were: Xw+ Xw+ for red 
eye female, and Xw Y for the white eye male.
Morgan’s hypothesis explained clearly why all the white eyed lies in F2 generation 
were only males.
Step 3: Test cross : Morgan wanted to test his hypothesis (Fig. 22-26c). He cross ed the 
P| white eyed male (XWY) with one of its own daughters, the  red eyed heterozygous 
female from F| generation. This test cross produced 129 re d-eyed females, 132 red-
eyed males, 88 white-eyed females and 86 white eyed m ales. White-eyed lies were 
less viable than red-eyed lies. Half the female ofsprin g in fact had red eyes and half 
had white. Similarly half the males had red eyes and half had white.4822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.16(a)
Fig 22.26(b)4922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.26(c)
Fig 22.26(d)5022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Step 4: Reciprocal cross as a conirmatory test: Appearance of white eyed female 
provided an opportunity for a further conirmatory test. Morgan ma ted a white  eyed 
female with a red-eyed male (Fig. 22.26d). All femal e ofspring had red eyes, and all 
male ofspring had white eyes. Then these Fi red eyed f emales and white eyed males 
were mated to produce F2. Half of the F2 females had red eyes, half had white. Similarly 
half of the F2 males had red eyes and half had white. This Fi x Fi cross was exactly like 
step 3 test cross.
A trait whose gene is present on X chromosome is called X - linked trait.  X - linked traits 
are commonly referred as sex-linked traits . A gene present only on X chromosome, 
having no counterpart on Y chromosome, is called X - linked gene.
Sex-linked inheritance follows a very speciic pattern. As  a son inherits his X chromosome 
only from his mother, and a daughter gets an X chromosome fr om each parent, an X 
- linked trait passes in a crisscross fashion from matern al grandfather (Pi) through his 
daughter (Fi) to the grandson (F2). It never passes direct from father to son because a 
son inherits only Y chromosome from father.
Morgan’s discovery of sex-linked inheritance was a great contribution to the 
understanding of genes and chromosome. In 1933, T. H. Mor gan was awarded a Nobel 
Prize for his contributions to genetics.
Y chromosome is not completely inert. It does carry a few gen es which have no 
counterpart on X chromosome. Such genes are called Y-Linked genes and their traits 
are called Y-linked traits e.g. SRY gene on Y chromosome of man determines maleness. 
Y - linked traits are found only in males. These traits d irectly pass through Y chromosome 
from father to son only. As females do not normally inherit Y chromosome, such traits 
can not pass to them. Some genes like bobbed gene in Drosophi la are present on X and Y 
both. These are called  X - and - Y linked genes . These are also called pseudoautosomal 
genes because their pattern of inheritance is like autosoma l genes.5122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Fig 22.27 Transmission of X-linked recessive traits(heamophil ia) in humans.
Sex - L inkage in Humans
Humans have many X - linked traits of which some like ha emophilia and colour blindness 
are recessive while others like hypophosphatemic or vitamin D resistant rickets are 
dominant. X - linked dominant is a trait which is determin ed by an X linked dominant 
gene, while X - linked recessive is a trait that is deter mined by an X - linked recessive 
gene. Their patterns of inheritance are very diferent from  each other.5222. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
X - linked recessive inheritance: Experimental matings are not practically possible in 
humans. Mode of inheritance of human traits can be traced through pedigrees.
Genetics of Haemophilia:  Haemophilia is a rare X — linked recessive trait. Haemop hiliac’s 
blood fails to clot properly after an injury, because it has  either a reduction or malfunction 
or complete absence of blood clotting factors. It is a serious h ereditary disease because 
a haemophiliac may bleed to death even from minor cuts. Hae mophilia is of three types: 
A, B and C. Haemophilia A and B are non - allelic rec essive sex - linked, but haemophilia 
C is an autosomal recessive trait. 80% haemophiliacs, sufe r from haemophilia A due 
to abnormality of factor VIII, about 20% sufer from haemophili a B due to disturbance 
in factor IX, but less than 1% sufer from haemophilia C d ue to reduction in factor XI. 
Being X - linked recessives, haemophilia A and B afec t men more than women, but 
haemophilia C afects both the sexes equally because it is  autosomal. Chances for a 
man to be afected by haemophilia A and B are greater than  a woman. A woman can 
sufer from haemophilia A or B only when she is homozygous for the recessive allele, 
but a man with just one recessive allele will display the  trait. Haemophilia A and B 
zigzag from maternal grandfather through a carrier daugh ter to a grandson. It never 
passes direct from father to son. Gene for normal is H. Gene for haemophilia A is h. 
In generation I of this pedigree (Fig. 22.27) a man (I - 2) sufering from haemophilia A 
marries a normal woman (I - 1). He passes haemophilia gene to his daughter (II - 2) 
through his X chromosome. He cannot pass this gene to his son (II - 3) because the son 
receives only Y chromosome from him. His daughter (II - 2)  also receives another X but 
with normal dominant allele from her mother (I - 1).
The daughter looks phenotypically normal, but she is heteroz ygous and a carrier for 
the recessive gene. When she marries a normal man (II - 1) she passes her father’s 
trait to one of her two sons (HI - 4) who inherits grandfather’ s X from her. The single 
recessive allele for haemophilia expresses successfull y in the hemizygous son because 
his Y chromosome does not carry its counterpart. The other son ( III - 3) is normal as he5322. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
inherits grand mother’s X with normal gene, One daughter (III - 1) with both normal X 
is normal, but the other daughter (III - 2) is carrier li ke her mother.
Activity:      Cases of Haemophilia A are reported in Queen Victoria’s f amily. Pedigree of 
Queen Victoria’s family (Fig. 22.28) indicates that Quee n Victoria was a carrier mother, 
because she gave birth to an afected son Prince Leopold. Pr ince Leopold passed on 
this recessive X - linked trait in typical zigzag fashion  through his carrier daughter (III - 
1) to his grandson Rupert (IV - 1). Assign genotype to each  individual. Can you explain 
how Alexis (IV - 3) became haemophiliac?
Fig 22.28 Pedigree of Queen Victoris’s family showing cases of Hemolhilia A.
Many X - linked traits in man are also found X - linked  in other mammals like mouse, 
rabbit, dog, sheep, horse, donkey, cattle, kangaroo and chi mpanzee.Was the 
mammalian X chromosome conserved throughout mammalian evolution?5422. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
:Genetics of colour-blindness
Normal trichromatic colour vision is based on three diferent k inds of cone cells in 
the retina, each sensitive to only one of the three primary col ours, red, green or blue. 
Each type of cone cell has speciic light absorbing protein s called opsins. The genes for 
red and green opsins are on X chromosome, while the gene for blue opsin is present 
on autosome 7. Mutations in opsin genes cause three types of c olour-biindness. A 
dichromat  can perceive two primary colours but is unable to perceive the one whose 
opsins are missing due to mutation. Protanopia is red blindness, deuteranopia is green 
blindness, while tritanopia is blue blindness. Some peop le can detect red and green but 
with altered perception of the relative shades of these colours . They have abnormal 
but still partially functional opsins. They are protanomalous  and deuteranomalous 
for red and green weakness respectively. A monochromat  can perceive one colour. 
Monochromacy is true colour-blindness. Blue cone monochromacy  is an X - linked 
recessive trait in which both red and green cone cells ar e absent. That is why it is also 
called red - green colour-blindness. It is a common here ditary disease. Like any sex 
- linked recessive trait, it also zigzags from maternal gr andfather through a carrier 
daughter to a grandson. It never passes direct from father to son. This type of colour-
blindness is more common in men than women, because chan ces for a male to be 
afected by it are muh more than a female.
  
 
Activity:  A sex-linked recessive allele “c” produces red - bli ndness. Its normal dominant 
allele is “C”. A normal woman whose father was red-blin d, marries a red-blind man. 
What proportion of their children can have normal colour vision?Testicular feminization syndrome is a rare X-linked rec essive trait.Although the 
persons afected by this trait have a male set of XY chromosome s, yet tfn gene 
on their X chromosome develops them physically into females. They have breast, 
female genitalia, a blind Vagina but no uterus. Degenera ted testis are also present 
in abdomen. Such individuals are happily married as f emales but are sterile. It is an 
androgen insensitivity syndrome. Male sex hormone testosterone has no efect on 
them.5522. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
X - linked dominant inheritance : Pattern of X - linked dominant inheritance is diferent 
from X - linked recessive. It is more common in females th an males. All daughters of an 
afected father, but none of his sons are afected. Any heter ozygous afected mother 
will pass the trait equally to half of her sons and half of  her daughters (Fig. 22.29). 
Hypophosphatemic rickets is an X - linked dominant trait. I t is a rare hereditary disease. 
It is diferent from common dietary rickets, which could be cured by taking vitamin D. 
It does not result from vitamin D deiciency but its cause is a  genetic communication 
failure at molecular level. The genes encoding bone protei ns never receive vitamin D’s 
message to function.
Fig 22.29 Tranmission Of X-linked dominant traits in humans s.5622. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
  Y - Linked inheritance : Pattern of Y - linked inheritance is very peculiar. Male ness is a 
Y - linked trait. Y - linked trait passes through Y - chr omosome from father to son only. 
Such traits cannot pass to daughters because they do not inher it Y - chromosome. 
All sons of an afected father are afected by a Y - linke d trait (Fig. 22.30). SRY’ gene 
on Y chromosome determines maleness in man. It is male se x switch which triggers 
developmental process towards maleness after 6 week pregna ncy.
   Fig 22.30 Y-linked inheritance in man5722. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Sex Limited Trait
A sex-limited trait is limited to only one sex due to anatomica l diferences. Such trait 
afects a structure or function of the body present in only mal es or only females. These 
trails may be controlled by sex-linked or autosomal genes. Genes for milk yield in dairy 
cattle afect only cows. Similarly beard growth in humans i s limited to men. A woman 
does not grow a beard herself but she can pass the genes specifying heavy beard growth 
to her sons.
Sex Inluenced Trait
Sex inluenced trait occurs in both males and females but it is more common in one sex. 
It is controlled by an allele that is expressed as dominan t in one sex but recessive in the 
other. This diference in expression is due to hormonal dif erence between the sexes. 
Pattern baldness is a sex inluenced trait. Many more men  than women are bald. It is 
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in males but as an autosomal recessive trait 
in females. A heterozygous male is bald but a heterozygous  female is not. A woman can 
be bald only when she is homozygous recessive.
Activity: A man is 45 years old and bald. His wife also has patte rn baldness. What is the 
risk that their son will lose his hair?
 DIABETES MELLITUS AND ITS GENETIC BASIS
     
Diabetes mellitus is a hereditary disease. It is actually  a heterogenous group of disorders 
which are characterized by elevated blood sugar level. Dia betics are unable to metabolise 
blood sugar in their body. They pass glucose in their uri ne. Diabetes is the leading cause 
of kidney failure, adult blindness, lower limb amputation  and heart disease.
  There are two major types of diabetes: Type I is IDDM or i nsulin dependent diabetes 
mellitus. Type II is NIDDM or non insulin dependent diabe tes mellitus. Type I is also 
called Juvenile diabetes because it usually occurs in e arly age before 40. It arises due to 
deiciency of pancreatic hormone insulin that normally routes  blood glucose to cells for 
use. Type I is an auto immune disorder. The immune sys tem backires and manufactures 
auto antibodies against body’s own cells. Sometimes, speciic  viral infections activate 
auto immune response. T - cells of immune system attack pa ncreas and destroy insulin 
producing (5 - cells. As a result, pancreas does not prod uce insulin. Diabetics of type I 
must receive exogenous (from outside source) insulin to survive .5822. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Progress is being made in understanding the genetic bas is of this disease. The •insulin 
gene is located on short arm of chromosome 11. Polymorphism an d genetic variations 
within this locus is responsible for diabetes type I susce ptibility. But today, it is no 
more just a recessive single gene trait, rather it is a mu ltifactorial (polygenic with 
environmental inluence) inheritance associated with several  alleles.
Diabetes mellitus type II is non insulin dependent. It acc ounts for 90% of all diabetic 
patients. These persons produce some endogenous insulin the mselves, but their 
body cells gradually fail to respond to insulin and cannot take up glucose from blood. 
They develop a sort of insulin resistance. It occurs among p eople over the age of 
40, and is more common among the obese. Obesity increases insulin resistance. As 
exercise reduces obesity it indirectly increases insuli n sensitivity and improves glucose 
tolerance.
There, deinitely exists a genetic component in the form of a n underlying tendency 
to develop diabetes under certain environmental conditions. Abou t 2% - 5% of type II 
diabetics get the disease early in life, before 25 year s of age. It is called maturity onset 
diabetes of the young (MODY). MODY can be inherited as an autosomal dominant 
trait. About 50% of cases of MODY are caused by mutations in glucokinase gene. 
Glucokinase enzyme usually converts glucose to glucose - 6 -  phosphate in pancreas. 
MODY can also be caused by mutations in any of the four other  genes which encode 
transcription factors involved in pancreatic development and in sulin regulation. But 
these four MODY genes do not play any signiicant role in ad ult - onset type II.
Blood pressure is also an example of multifactorial trait. T here is a correlation between 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure of parents and their c hildren. This correlation is 
partly due to genes common in them. Blood pressure is also i nluenced by environmental 
factors such as diet, stress and tension.5922. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
Exercise
Q1    Fill in the blanks.
1.  _________is the basic unit of biological information.
2.  A sudden change in the structure of a gene is calle d ______
3. _______is the chance of an event to occur. 
4. A cross among monohybrids is a________cross.
5. An individual with a homozygous genotype is called_____ ___ . 
6. Diferent alleles of a gene that are both expressed in a  heterozygote are 
called____________
7. When a heterozygote exceeds the phenotypic expression of both the homozygotes 
the phenomenon     is called__________ . 
8.      When a single gene afects two or more traits, the p henomenon is called________
9.      A gene with multiple phenotypic efect is called_ ________ .
10.  The phenomenon of staying together of all the genes of a  chromosome is 
called_______
11. _________ minimizes the chances of genetic recombin ation. 
12.  _________is an exchange of segments between non-si ster chromatids of homologous 
chromosomes   during meiosis.
13. All cliromosomes other than sex chromosomes are called__ _______. 
14.   _______is the maleness determining gene in man.
15. Type __________of diabetes mellitus is non insulin dependent. 
16. Polygenic inheritance with environmental inluence is called __________ inheritance.
Q.2     Short questions.
1. In grasshopper, the male has XY and the female has XX types of sex chromosomes. 
2. Pea is normally a self fertilizing plant. 
3. Dihybrids are ofspring of the parents who difer in one contrasting pair of trait. 
4.  X - linked traits pass direct from father to son. 
5. A person sufering from Blue cone monochromacy can not se e blue colour. 
6.  In birds and moths eggs determine sex.
7. A homozygote forms all gametes of the same type.
8. The allele for a sex limited trait is dominant in one s ex but recessive in the other.6022. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
9. Pattern baldness is a sex inluenced trait. 
10. Carriers of haemophilia show no symptoms of the disease .
1.  Diferentiate between :
Phenotype and genotype
Homozygous and heterozygous
Autosome and sex chromosome
Allele and multiple allele
Incomplete dominance and codominance
Continuous and discontinuous variationsGene and allele
Monohybrid and dihybrid
Dominance and epistasis
X-linked trait and Y-linked trait
Sex limited and sex inluenced trait
Dominant trait and recessive trait
Wild type and mutant
2. What is a gene pool?
3. Was pea a lucky choice for Mendel? What would have ha ppened if he had studied 
an eighth character? 
4. What is a test cross? Why did Mendel devise this cross?  
5. What would happen if alleles of a pair do not segregate  at meiosis? How would it 
afect the purity of gamete? 
6. If the alleles do not assort independently, which type of  combination is missing in 
the progeny. 
7. Why has each gamete equal chance of getting one or the other allele of a pair? 
8. Does the dominant allele modify the determinative nature of its recessive partner?. 
What sort of relationship do they have? 
9. Which type of traits can assort independently? 
10.  Why does the blood group phenotype of a person remain constant throughout 
life’?
11. What is a universal blood donor? 
12. How can you protect the baby against Rh - incompatibility ? 
13. Which type of genes do not obey law of independent assor tment? 
14. How can linked genes be separated from each other ? 
15. What is multifactorial inheritance? 
16. What is MODY?
17. Can a child have more intelegence (IQ score) than hi s parents?Q.4  Short Questions.6122. Variation And Genetics eLearn.Punjab
1. What is incomplete dominance? Explain it with an examp le.
2. Deine Mendel’s law of segregation. Explain it with an example. 
3. Deine Mendel’s law of independent assortment. Explain it with an example.
4. Deine probability. Derive 9:3:3:1 F2‘ratio of independen t assortment through 
product rule. 
5. What is codominance? Explain the phenomenon of codominanc e with an example. 
6. Deine multiple alleles. Describe multiple allelic bl ood group system of man. 
7. What is Rh factor? Describe the genetic basis of Rh - b lood group system of man. 
8. What is erythroblastosis foetalis? Discuss this adverse ef ect of Rh incompatibility? 
Also suggest a therapy to avoid Rh sensitization of an Rh” mothe r married to an Rh+ 
man. 
9. Deine epistasis. Explain epistatic gene interaction with  an example.
10. What is a pleiotropic gene? Discuss pleiotropy with exam ples. 
11. What are polygenes? Explain polygenic inheritance.
12. What is crossing over? Deine recombination frequency an d explain its signiicance. 
13. What are sex-chromosomes? Discuss the chromosomal patterns  of sex 
determination in organisms.
14. Compare chromosomal determination of sex between Drosophila  and humans. 
15. Deine gene pool. Explain the concept of gene pool in a s ample population. 
16. What is sex linkage? Explain T. H. Morgan’s study of sex - linkage in Drosophila.
17. Compare the pattern of inheritance of an X - linked dom inant trait with an X - 
linked recessive trait in humans.
18. Explain diabetes mellitus and its genetic basis.
19. Discuss the genetics of colour-blindness or haemophilia .Q.4 Extensive Questions