CHAPTER
19  GROWTH  AND
DEVELOPMENT
Animation 19: Homeostasis
Source & Credit: Wikispaces219. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
In the course of its life cycle an organism changes from a fertilized egg into an adult. As 
development proceeds, all sorts of the changes take place. T he most obvious change 
is growth. The progressive changes which are undergone b efore an organism acquires 
its adult form constitute embryonic development. Growth is the per manent and 
irreversible increase in size that occurs as an organism  mature.
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN PLANTS
  
In plants growth and development involve cell division, elongati on and diferentiation 
of cells into tissues and then organs. Growth is an irreversi ble increase in size and 
development is a programmed series of stages from a simple r to more complex form. 
As development proceeds, cellular diferentiation of structure  and function takes place.
A plant has a growth pattern called open growth . Throughout life, the plant adds new 
organs such as branches, leaves and roots, enlarging from  the tips of roots and shoot 
but the rate of growth is not uniform throughout the plant body. At the beginning, the 
growth is slow, but gradually it becomes rapid, attains a m aximum, then gradually slows 
down. In vascular plants, growth occurs through the activity of meristems. Meristems 
are young tissues or group of cells that retain the potential to divide. In lower plants, 
the entire plant body is capable of growing, but in higher  plants, the entire plant body 
is not capable of growing but growth is limited to certain reg ions known as growing 
points.These growing points consist of groups of cells which are capable of division, 
these growing points are called meristems. These meristem atic cells are located at the 
stem and root and they are of the following types.
(i) Apical Meristems
                            
 The apical meristems are found at the tips of roots and shoot and are primarily 
concerned with the extension of plant body. These are perpe tual growth zones found 
at the apices of roots and stems. They are responsible for i ncrease in the number of 
cells at the tips of roots and stem, so they play important role in primary growth (Fig 
19.1).319. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
(ii) Intercalary Meristems
                                       
These are the parts of apical meristem which get separate d from apex by permanent 
tissues. They are situated at the bases of internodes in ma ny plants. They play important 
role in the production of leaves and lowers. These are of tem porary nature.
Fig. 19.1 Photomicrographs of the apex of a shoot (a) and a root (b) .
Animation 19.1: Apical Meristems
Source & Credit: Animated Abstarct419. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
(iii) Lateral Meristems
Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells. They  are present in dicots and 
gymnosperms. Vascular and cork cambium are the example s of lateral meristem. They 
play an important role in the increase in diameter of stem and root and in secondary 
growth are determinate i.e. they grow to certain size and the n stop e.g. leaves, lowers 
and fruits; while others are indeterminate i.e. they- grow  by meristems that continually 
replenish themselves, remaining youthful e.g. vegetative root and stem.
Types of Growth:
(i) Primary Growth :  Primary’ tissue is added by the apical meristem
(ii) Secondary Growth :  Secondary tissue is added by the intercalary or vascular  
cambium leading to increase in thickness.
Phases of Growth :  Growth of multicellular plant is divided into four phases, ce ll 
division, elongation, maturation and diferentiation.
During cell division , the number of cells increase by mitosis. It occurs at the  tip of root 
and shoot where cells are small, have spherical nuclei lying in the center of cytoplasm, 
which is non-vacuolated. As a result of cell division, each  daughter cell proceeds to 
enlarge. Synthesis of cytoplasm and cell wall material a lso takes place in this zone.
A little distance from apex of root and shoot lies the zone of elongation  and is only 
of few millimeters in length. During elongation the cell volu me increases upto 150 fold 
due to uptake of water. Plasticity of the cell wall increase s and wall pressure is reduced. 
Synthesis of new cytoplasm and cell wall material proceed s on.  
During maturation , the inal size of a given type of a cell is attained.The cells which 
develop into pith, cortex and certain other tissues do not elongate  further along the 
axis, while other cells like ibers and tracheids elonga te lengthwise more than in other 
direction.519. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
               
 
When the cell enlargement ceases, the process of diferentiation starts. During this 
growth phase the walls of cells become thicker, the walls of many kinds of cells and 
tissues become pitted; thickening appear on the walls of xy lem vessels, cells of various 
tissues difer in spatial dimensions and many new structu ral features develop. (Fig 
19.2 )
Conditions of Growth
The growth rate is inluenced by number of factors both exter nal and internal. 
External factors are temperature, light, oxygen, carbon diox ide, water, nutrition etc. 
while internal factors are hormones, vitamins etc.
Fig. 19.2 The root tip is divided into four zones.619. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
(A) Externa! factors
  
 (i) Temperature :  Temperature inluences the rate of growth within a certain ran ge (0-35°C). 
Normally rate of growth increases with rise of temperature and de creases with decrease 
in temperature. For maximum growth, the optimum temperature is 25-3 0°C and it is least 
at 5-10°C. But at a very high temperature (35-40°C), the rate o f growth stops and the plant 
may die.
(ii) Light : Light plays very important role in the growth of plants. By lig ht, we mean the 
fractions of light, which is absorbed by plant during photosyn thesis. Generally, light inluences 
growth in three ways; intensity, quality and duration.
The increase in intensity of light increases the number of cell  divisions. The red light favours 
elongation of cells and blue light enhances cell division but retards cell enlargement. Similarly, 
ultraviolet rays also retard cell elongation. Duration of lig ht affects the growth of vegetative 
and reproductive structures. It also plays a role in inducing or su ppressing lowering. The 
phenomenon is termed as photoperiodism .
(iii) Oxygen : For successful growth, regular supply of oxygen is neces sary. Without 
oxygen, no metabolic activity is possible and no growth takes p lace. A very high 
supply of oxygen however, inhibits growth.
(iv) Carbon Dioxide :  We know carbon dioxide is essential for carrying out normal  
process of photosynthesis but a very high concentration of it can  retard growth.
(v) Water : By absorbing water, the cells elongate. The plant growth ce ases in the 
absence of water.
(vi) Nutrition : Nutrients supply energy to growing plants. With the increas e in nutrition, 
growth increases, whereas decrease in nutrition causes r etardation of growth.719. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Differentiation
As you have studied, once a seed has germinated, the plan t’s further development 
depends on the activities of the meristematic tissues, and we  know that shoot and root 
apical meristems give rise to all cells of the adult plant.  Diferentiation is the formation 
of specialized tissues, which can be considered to occur in plant in ive stages (Fig 19.3). 
Stage 1           Represents the formation of embryo.
Stage 2          Within the embryo, shoot and root apical meristems are recogni zed.Fig. 19.3Graphic representation of growth and diferentiation in  plants
(B) Internal Factors 
(i) Hormones : Plant hormones also inluence growth e.g. Indole-3-acetic ac id / (IAA) 
causes elongation of cells.
(ii) Vitamins  : Vitamins are orgasmic compounds synthesized within the pla nt bodies 
in the presence of light. If the plants are grown in dark , the vitamin deiciencies are 
induced and growth of plant body ceases.819. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Stage 3 Cambium is recognized, it is responsible for secondary g rowth.
Stage 4  There is production of leaf primordial (these are the cell s committed to become 
leaves, shoot or roots). Root primordia develop from the root cambium,  called pericycle. 
Leaf and shoot primordia develop directly from apical meris tematic cells.
 
Stage 5 Fully diferentiated tissues and structure are formed incl uding xylem, phloem, 
leaves, shoots and roots.
Growth Correla tions
The development of a plant is usually correlated with its gr owth and diferent organs 
growing at diferent rates in diferent directions and the de velopment of diferent parts 
takes place. Such reciprocal relationship is known as correlation .
One of the most important correlative efect in plants is apical dominance . In many 
plants, only apical bud grows while growth is suppressed  in lower axillary buds. In an 
experiment, when apical bud was removed, the growth in the  lower buds was inhibited. 
So active shoot apex controls the development of lateral buds. Thu s, the auxin of the 
terminal bud is responsible for inhibiting the growth of la teral buds by a phenomenon 
known as apical dominance (Fig 19.4). Later Thimann an d Skoog in 1934 performed 
experiments and showed that  apical dominance  was caused by auxin difusing from 
the apical bud which inhibited the growth of lateral shoots i s called inhibitory efect . 
The removal of apex releases the lateral buds from apical  dominance. It is called 
compensatory efect. 
Research has also indicated that not only auxin causes api cal dominance, cytokinins 
also play important role in apical dominance and in many cases if cytokinins are 
applied directly on the inhibited bud, it allows lateral b uds to be released from apical 
dominance. It is also seen that those plants that have dense g rowth of lateral branches, 
have very little apical dominance. As far as practical ap plication of apical dominance 
is concerned, it plays an important role in tap root developmen t, and the inhibition of 
sprouting of lateral buds (eyes) in potato tuber by applying  synthetic auxin. In the later 
case, the sprouting of eyes is prevented and storing period is increased from one to 
three years (Fig. 19.4).919. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 19.4 Apical Dominance : The Inluence of Auxin1019. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN ANIMALS
         
Embryology is the study of growth and diferentiation undergone  by an organism in 
the course of its development from a single fertilized egg i nto a highly complex and an 
independent living being like his parents.
Development is an ordered sequence of irreversible steps, w ith each step setting up 
the necessary conditions for the next step. Since all anima ls are somehow related 
through the process of evolution, there are some similarities i n their various forms 
of development. Here, we will see a broad outline of the ear ly stages of development. 
This can be described in terms of several stages, depic ted below:1119. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Development of Chick
The development of chick has been taken as a basic schem e of development. It will 
provide basis for understanding the early  diferentiation of  the organ systems and the 
fundamental process of body formation, which is common to all vertebrates.
Fertilization and Incubation : The chick egg (called the yolk) is surrounded by various  
accessory coverings secreted by the female reproductive trac t.
Fertilization is internal and normally takes place just as  ovum is entering the oviduct. 
The shell is secreted as the egg passes through the shel l gland (the uterus).
When an egg has been laid, the development ceases unles s the temperature of egg is 
kept nearly up to the body temperature of the mother. In incub ating eggs artiicially, the 
incubators are usually regulated at temperature between 36 -38°C. At this temperature, 
the chick completes development and is hatched on the twenty i rst day.
Fig. 19.5 Cleavage stages in chick
Animation 19.2: Development in Chick 
Source & Credit: Backyard Chicken1219. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Cleavage : 
Immediately after fertilization, the egg undergoes a serie s of mitotic divisions, called 
cleavage. In bird’s egg the process of cell division is c onined to the small disc of 
protoplasm lying on the surface of the yolk at the. animal pol e. This type of cleavage is 
referred as discoidal cleavage. The cleavage furrows sta rt in the clear cytoplasmic region 
(Fig 19.5). The irst two cleavage planes are vertical whi le the third runs horizontally 
parallel to the surface and thus cuts underneath the cytopla sm and separates it from 
the yolk. The successive cleavages become irregular and number of cells increase.
Morulla  : Cleavage results in the formation of a rounded closely packe d mass of 
blastomeres. This is morula, it consists of a disc shaped mass of cells two or more 
layers in thickness (blastoderm) lying close to the yolk. I n the center of the blastoderm, 
the cells are smaller and completely deined while those at the periphery, are lattened, 
and larger. 
Blastulla :
The morula stage is short-lived and soon changes into blastul a and is characterized by 
the presence of a segmentation cavity or blastocoele. The disc oidal cap of cells above 
the blastocoele is called blastoderm . The marginal area of the blastoderm in which 
the cells remain undetached from the yolk and closely adh erent to it is called the zone 
of junction (Fig 19.6).
 
19.6: BIastuia and gastrula stages in embryo of chick1319. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
 
Gastrulation :  It is characterized by the movement and rearrangement of ce lls in the 
embryo. During gastrulation, the blastoderm splits into two laye rs: an upper layer of 
cells called epiblast , and a lower layer of cells called hypoblast . The epiblast is mainly 
presumptive ectoderm and mesoderm (Fig 19.7). The hypobla st is mainly presumptive 
endoderm because hypoblast cells grow outward over the surfa ce of the yolk, then 
downward around it to form the endodermal lining of a yolk sa c. At this stage, the central 
cells of blastoderm can be separated from the yolk, under these central cells a pool of 
luid develops, raising them of the yolk and giving the area  a translucent appearance 
- the area pellucida , while the peripheral part of the blastoderm where the ce lls lie 
unseparated from the yolk is termed as area opaca, the whi te area that transmits 
light. The upper layer of the blastoderm consists of the pre sumptive mesoderm and 
ectoderm.
Notochord and Mesoderm Formation
 
In the chick, the mesodermal cells do not invaginate as in amphibians, but migrate 
medially and caudally from both sides and create a mid line thickening called primitive 
streak (which grows rapidly in length as more and more p resumptive mesodermal 
cells continue to aggregate in the middle. All this results  in the change of shape of 
blastoderm, (it changes from circular to pear shaped). 
Animation 19.2: Mesoderm Formation
Source & Credit: UNSW Embryology1419. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 19.7 Gastrulation in the chick
The anterior end of the primitive streak is occupied by an aggregation-the . primitive 
node or notochordal cells while rest of cells are mesodermal  cells. Thus primitive streak 
represents the dorsal and both lateral lips of blastopore.
The continuous migration of cells takes place between epibl ast and hypoblast and 
results in the formation of groove along the whole length of prim itive streak. This is 
named as primitive groove, marked on either side by thicken ed margins, the primitive 
ridges.1519. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
At the cephalic end of primitive streak, closely packed ce lls form a local thickening 
known as Hensen’s node. The Hensen’s node however, mark the site of a somewhat 
special type of invagination.
Shortly, after the primitive streak has been formed and the endoderm was well 
established, cells begin to push in from the region of Hen sen’s node to form the 
rod like notochord in the midline beneath the ectoderm. In ch ick embryo of about 
18 hours, notochord is one of the few prominent structural featu res. In sections of 
embryo incubated from 18-20 hours, it is seen that ectoderm has spread and become 
organized into a coherent layer of cells merging peripher ally with the yolk and the 
marginal area where the expanding germ layers merge with the under lying yolk is 
known as germ wall and the cavity between the yolk and the endoderm which has 
been called gastrocoele is now termed as primitive gut.
From Hensen’s node, dorsal mesoderm is formed and is orga nized into somites. The 
lateral plate mesoderm is splitted into two sheet like layers  viz somatic mesoderm 
and splanchnic mesoderm, with a space between them. The  cavity formed between 
somatic and splanchnic mesoderm is coelom. Somites are see n in 25-26 hours embryo, 
these are compact cell masses lying immediately lateral to neural folds.
Neurulation : 
On the dorsal surface of gastrula, over the notochord, presump tive neural ectoderm 
is present in the form of a band. As gastrula elongates, th e band thickens to form a 
neural plate. In chicks of 18 hours, neural plate was s een as a lat, thickened area of 
ectoderm. In embryos of 21-22 hours, a longitudinal folding  has occurred, establishing 
the neural groove in the mid dorsal line, on either side of neural folds. In 24 hours 
embryos, the folding of neural plate is clearly visible. The embryo is now termed as 
neurula. The anterior end of the neural groove is widest an d forms the future brain 
and rest of portion is future spinal cord. In the meantime, the neural plate sinks and 
the neural folds grow toward one another and meet in the midd orsal line, fuse and 
convert the neural groove into neural tube. At each end of neur al tube, a small opening 
called anterior and posterior neuro-pores are also seen, wh ich close later on. With the 
formation of neural tube, there is formation of central nervous system and the cavity 
enclosed is known as neurocoel. This whole process is nam ed as neurulation.1619. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Fig:19.8 Early chick embryos
Mechanisms of Development
We know that from a single celled zygote, multicellular in dividual is formed and zygote 
contains complete information in the form of genome which has come in the form of 
chromosomes from the eggs and sperms. During cleavage, zyg ote divides into many 
cells. Each cell has full set of chromosomes and gets comp lete instructions from the 
parents. During diferentiation however some genes remain ac tive, while others switch 
of. The importance of nucleus and cytoplasm during developm ent is revealed from 
the following experiments.
1.In 1892, Hans Dietrisch, took sea urchin egg at two-cell sta ge, shook it apart and 
separated it into two cell. Later on, it was seen that both half  embryos developed into 
normal larvae. Dietrisch concluded that both these cells .
2.  contained all the genetic information of the original zygote.1719. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Another experiment was performed by Spemann. He took salam ander zygote, and 
with the help of minute ligature of human hair divided the zygote into two equal 
halves. The nucleus was present in one half, but the other  half had no nucleus. When 
the developmental process continued, it was seen that cleavage  was completed in the 
half containing nucleus but the anucleate half was not see n dividing. Eventually, when 
nucleated side had reached a 16-cell stage, one of the c leavage nuclei crossed the 
narrow cytoplasmic bridge to the anucleate side. Immediatel y this side started dividing.
Fig. 19.9 Spemann’s delayed nucleation experiments. Two  kinds of experiments were performed. A, Hair 
ligature was used to constrict an uncleaved fertilized new t egg. Both sides contained part of the gray 
crescent. The nucleated side alone cleaved until a de scendant nucleus crossed over the cytoplasmic bridge. 
Then both sides completed cleavage and formed two complete embryos. B, Hair ligature was placed so 
that the nucleus and gray crescent were completely separa ted. The side lacking the gray crescent became 
an unorganized piece of belly tissue; the other side deve loped normally.1819. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
3.Spemann also performed another experiment. He separated th e two halves of 
embryo; both of them contained nuclei. Both these halves develop ed into complete 
embryos. He also observed that from a 16-cell embryo even, i f a single cell is separated, 
it contains a complete set of genes and form a complete embry o. Through series of 
experiments, Spemann also observed that sometimes it may hap pen that the nucleated 
half can develop into abnormal ball of cells. Later studies  revealed that development 
depends on the position of gray crescent. Gray crescent is th e pigment free area that 
appears at the time of fertilization. So in the half lacking  gray crescent, no further 
development can take place.
 On the basis of above experiments, Spemann made two conclu sions.
i) All cells contain the same nuclear information.
ii) In the gray crescent area, cytoplasm contains informati on essential    for development.
Next  question  is, if all the cells contain same nuclear  material, what causes the cells 
to diferentiate. There are two ways by which cell undergo diferentiation and become 
committed to particular determinative molecules.
1.   During cleavage, cytoplasmic segregation of determinative take s place.
2.   Induction or interaction with the neighboring cells takes pl ace.
Role of Cytoplasm in Development
  It is known that diferent cytoplasmic components contain difer ent morpho  genetic 
determinants that are responsible for cell diferentiation. T hese determinants are 
present in blastomeres. The fertilized egg of an ascidia n contains cytoplasm of ive 
diferent colours that is segregated into diferent blastomeres.
1.  Clear cytoplasm.  It produces larval epidermis.
2.  Yellow cytoplasm.  It gives rise to muscle cells.
3. Gray vegetal cytoplasm.  It gives rise to gut.
4. Grey equatorial cytoplasm.  It produces notochord and neural tube.1919. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Role of Nucleus in Development
                                 
Most gene controlled substances, which can easily be iden tiied are found in the 
cytoplasm, and are probably produced in it. Through exper iment, it is found that 
production of developmentally active substances by the nucleus  itself, or its immediate 
neighborhood, is, however available in some cases. One of s uch example is in the 
multicellular alga, Acetabularia. It consists of rhizoid, which is attached to the ground, 
from which arises a long stalk with an umbrella shaped cap at its top. On the basis 
of structure and shape of the cap, two species of Acetabularia  have been identiied; 
Acetabularia mediterranea , which has regular shaped cap, and A. crenulata , which has 
irregular shaped cap.
Fig. 19.10 Nuclear control of cap structures in two species of Acetabularia.2019. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
There is only a single nucleus, although they may attain the size of several centimeters 
or more. Haemmerling showed that if the cap is removed, a n ew one is regenerated. 
He cut of the nucleus containing rhizome from an alga of one  species (A. mediterranea)  
and grafted a similar piece containing the nucleus of an other species (A. crenulata ). 
When the cap was now removed, it was seen that the new rege nerated one had the 
characters of A. crenulata . So nucleus lying at the base of the alga and not the stalk  
to which the regenerate was attached determined the structure  of cap. It means that 
irrespective of the fact to which species the cytoplasm belong , the genes were able to 
express according to the type of nucleus  
From all these experiments  , it was concluded that both  ge ne and cytoplasm play 
important role in development . Nucleus contain all gene, wh ich determine the 
characteristics of the individual, while cytoplasm plays th e role of selection of genes.
Concept of Differentiation: 
A fertilized egg contains cytoplasmic components that are une qually distributed within 
the egg. These diferent cytoplasmic components are believed  to have morphogenetic 
determinants  that control the functioning of a speciic cell type. This is  now called 
diferentiation.Zygote contains complete information for the develop ment of an 
individual but it is diicult to see, how these cells difere ntiate.
In order to understand the concept of diferentiation, Spemann performed a series of 
experiments on amphibian embryo.
He took out piece of ectoderm from frog’s embryo and grew it in  a separate dish. The 
embryo from which the piece of ectoderm was removed , was u nable to form normal 
nervous system but has a defective nervous system. Similarly  , the isolated piece did not 
develop any structure  even though it was active and healthy .  In another experiment , 
he separated the mesoderm underlying ectoderm and folded the lap of ectoderm to 
its original piece . The frog did not develop any nervous sy stem. So it was proved that 
mesoderm had some efect on the ectoderm to simulate the ectoderm  cells to form 
nervous system.2119. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Embryonic Induction  
                     
The capacity of some cells to evoke a speciic development res ponse in other is widespread 
phenomenon in development . Work on embryonic induction was r eported by Hans Spemann 
and Hilde Mangold in 1924. They took two embryos of salaman der at the gastrula stage and 
removed a piece of dorsal blastopore lip from one embryo , an d transplanted it into a ventral 
or lateral position of another salamandar gastrula. It invagin ated and developed a notochord 
and somites. It also induced the second embryo to form neural  tube and a complete nervous 
system was formed where the dorsal balstopore lip was plac ed . The developing embryo had 
both the grafted tissue and induced lost time. Later on, it wa s seen that only cells from the 
dorsal lip of balstopore were capable of inducing a comple te embryo . This area corresponds 
to the presumptive area of notochord, somites and prechordal pla te. Spemann designated 
the dorsal lip area the primary organizer  because it was the only tissue capable of inducing 
development of secondary embryo in the host . This was calle d primary induction
AGING                       
                
Aging is an inevitable process and despite all the eforts to inhibit or stop it aging 
process goes on . It can be deined as negative physiologica l changes in our body . We 
identify the adult individual by the following signs of old age , all of them need not be 
present e.g. loss of hair pigment , development of small pi gmented areas in the skin 
of face and arms , dryness and wrinkling of skin , los s of agility , increased weight due 
to fat poor vision and forgetfulness , general weakness and decreased body immunity. 
Degeneration of organ and tissue may also take place e.g. i n joints, arthritis arises from 
the degenration of cartilage , degeneration and disappeara nce of the elastic tissues in 
the tunica media of the blood vessel result in arteriosclerosi s , blood clotting in the 
coronary arteries.2219. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
                                     
Fig. 19.11 The spemann primary organizer experiment2319. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
The exact process of aging is still unknown , but the follow ing points are worth 
consideration.
1. The cells of tissues have only a inite number of mitotic di vision and hence the cells  
may have reached their inite number by the time tissue or organ is fully grown. For 
example in the case of nervous system, mental activity and m emory deteriorate and 
there are fewer nerve cells in old age.
2.  Changes in intracelluar substances take place during a ging . For example, collagen 
acquires increased cross linkages in its protein molecul es , while elastic tissues loss their 
elasticity with the passage of the time . There is also har dening and loss of resilience in 
dense connective tissues and cartilage.
Today, there  is  a   great interest in 
gerontology, the study of aging. The 
number of older individuals are expected 
to rise. In the next half century, the 
number of people over age 75 will rise 
from the present 8 million to 14.5 million 
,and the number of over age 80 will rise 
from 5 million to 12 million. The human 
life span is judge to be maximum of 120-
125 years. The present goal of gerontology 
is not necessarily to increase life span but 
to increase health span.3.       Spontaneous mutation may result in 
loss of cells and degeneration of tssues . 
The process of aging can be slowed down 
by better nutrition and improved living 
conditions e.g. regular meals, regular 
exercise , adequate sleep , abstinence from 
smoking and maintaining ideal weigth can 
prolong life by an average of 11 years.2419. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
REGENRATION
 
 The ability to regain or recover the lost or injured part of the  body is called regeneration  .In 
sponges due to simple organization sponges possess greate pow er of regeneration . These 
not only replace the parts lost during injury , but any pie ce of the body is capabale of growing 
into a complete sponge. The process, is however , very slow a nd requires months or years 
for the complete development .
If lobster loses its pincer claw a new claw regenerates.  If starish breakes of portions of 
their arms into pieces till the central disc completely devoi d of arms is left , the central disc 
in almost all cases and also the arms in some cases are capable of developing into separate 
individuals. If head of earthworm is removed, a new head regenerates. Limb regeneration 
has been studied mostly in salamanders of various ages. I n these forms, the limbs are readily 
regenerated throughout life, more rapidly when the amphibi an is young and small. Besides 
limb, other parts of the body also have considerable regener ation capacity e.g. tail in the 
larva of amphibians and in lizards. For example, lizar d can easily discard its tail but tail can 
be regenerated by special features of its tail.
Healing of fracture and repair of a skin wound are some other examples of regeneration.
 In plants, regeneration is the basis of plant propagation. Almost any part or even a very small 
fragments of a plant e.g. a piece of stem or leaf or even a  single tissue cell may develop” into 
a full plant. A part of the stem with a few leaves may be taken from many kinds of plants and 
when planted in soil form a complete plant.
                                      
Animation 19.3: Regenration
Source & Credit: Giphy2519. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
In the process of regeneration, many of the various cell type s which were present in the 
missing part of the body are replaced by the diferentiation  of cells e.g. in latworms, 
and planaria the unspecialized cells, neoblasts, which  are always present in the body 
of adult are mobilized and migrate to the site of amputation, w here they diferentiate 
into specialized cell types. But in other organisms like s alamanders or newts some 
of the specialized tissue cell types in the stump of an am putated limb apparently 
dediferentiate (become less specialized) and then procee d to diferentiate into the 
same and probably diferent types of cells.
Fig:19.12 Regeneration in (a) Start ish (b) Planaria2619. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
ABNORMAL DEVELOPMENT
      
Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions, some parts of the bod y show abnormal 
development. Teratology is the branch of biology, which deals  with these abnormal 
developments and causes for such developments. Anything whi ch interferes with the 
normal process of development is the factor causing abnormali ties.
The normal process of development is disturbed by abnormali ties inherited from 
parents, abnormalities due to chromosomes or genes, environmen tal factors or 
metabolic defects.
Abnormalities are inherited from parents through abnormal or  defective gene(s). 
Abnormality of development is also related to the presence of d efective gene on sex 
chromosomes e.g. in haemophilia only males sufer from this  disease. It again, depends 
whether the gene is dominant or recessive, homozygous or heter ozygous.
Chromosomal abnormalities result when one of the sex chromosome s (x or y) is 
missing or extra and these abnormalities lead to syndromes.  Kline-felter’s Syndrome 
(xxy) is an example of trisomy of the sex chromosome while Turner’s Syndrome (xo) 
is the condition in which one of the sex chromosomes is missi ng. Another condition, 
xyy leads to tallness, aggressiveness, mental defect and antisocial behavior. These 
abnormalities arise during the formation of gametes, when th ese gametes unite to 
from zygote.
Environmental factors causing or contributing to abnormal develop ment are 
grouped together as teratogens. Ionizing radiations (e.g. x. rays) are well known for 
their teratogenic action. Because, they often have their efect on the developing ovum 
or spermatozoan, causing damage or changes (mutations) in th e genes. Nutritional 
deiciencies, absence of certain substances (e.g. vitamin s and trace elements), toxins 
and drugs even ingested by mother, efect the diferentiation of every tissue in the 
foetus. If such deiciency is high, a cell may cause d eath of foetus.2719. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Metabolic defects lead to structural deviations from the normal.  During 
organogenesis, when various body organs are formed, sometime s, one organ or its 
part is missing or it is repeated and it can result into ab normal organs or body parts 
and the individual born are malformed.
In microcephaly, the individuals are born with small sku ll. Individuals with cleft  palate 
have their upper lip folded or the individual has harelip . In conditions of the ingers in 
hand or feet are more or less than ive.
EXERCISE
Q1. FIll in the blanks.
(i) The  inluence of notochordal cells on the ectodermal cells to become nervous 
system  was called____________ .
(ii)  _____________is a condition in which individuals have sm all skull.
(iii)  Growth is accompanied by two factors.
                     (a) by increase in _______________ (b) increase in_____________.
(iv) ______________are the regions where growth is initiated b y the proliferation of cells.
Q.2      Write whether the statement is true or false  and write the correct statement 
if false.
i). Primary  growth leads to increase in length, while s econdary growth leads to increase 
in width.
ii). The plants in which lowering is not at all efected b y the day length are called day 
neutral plants.
iii). The somatic mesoderm soon splits in the middle to form two layers  
                         (a)         Outer parietal l ayer        (b)     Inner visceral layer
iv). In the clear cytoplasmic area, cytoplasm contains infor mation essential for 
development.
v) The phase of cell movement and rearrangement is called  cleavage.2819. Growth and development eLearn.Punjab
Q.4    Short questions.
(i)                      What is organizer and inducer substance?
(ii)                     What is diferentiation?
(iii)                    Deine embryonic induction.
(iv)                    Diferentiate between growth and develop ment.
(v)                       What is meristem?
Q.5              Extensive questions.
(i)    What is aging. How will you explain this process.
(ii)   What is regeneration? Why it is so efective in some animals  and missing in others?
(iii)   Describe in detail the developmental processes of chick.
(iv)   What is growth, discuss diferent phases and condition for  growth?
(v)    What is development, describe the principles of develop ment in detail?