CHAPTER
23 BIOTECHNOLOGY
Animation 23 : Biotechnology
Source & Credit: Wikispaces223.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Since Mendel’s work was rediscovered in 1900, geneticis ts have made startling advances 
which have led to a new era of DNA technology. Modem techniqu es enable
desired substance, for example insulin. Not very long ago,  people with insulin dependent
they receive human insulin, a product of biotechnology. Sinc e the 1980s, biotechnology 
has produced drugs and vaccines to curb human illnesses . 
Genetically, engineered bacteria have been used to clean up environmental pollutants, 
increase the fertility of the soil, and kill insect pests. Biotechnology also extends beyond 
multicellular organisms. It is now possible to alter the gen otype and subsequently the 
phenotype of plants and animals. Indeed, gene therapy in  humans, attempting to repair 
a faulty gene is already undergoing clinical trials. T here are those who are opposed to 
manipulation of genes for any reason. Although, there have b een no ill efects as yet, 
they fear the possibility of health and ecological repercus sions in the future.
Cloning of a gene 
      
 Produces many identical copies. Recombinant DNA technology is used when a very 
large quantity of a gene is required. The use of polymer ase chain reaction (PCR) creates 
a lesser number of copies within a laboratory test tube. 
Recombinant DNA Technology 
     
Recombinant DNA technology popularly known as genetic engine ering aims at 
synthesizing recombinant DNA which contains DNA from two dife rent sources. In 
order to produce recombinant DNA, the following are required:  
1. Gene of interest, which is to be cloned. 
2. Molecular scissors to cut out the gene of interest. 
3. Molecular carrier or vector, on which gene of interest cou ld be placed. 
4. The gene of interest alongwith the vector is then introduced in to an expression 
system, as a result of which a speciic product is made.323.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
How t o get a gene? 
There are three possible ways to get the gene of interest.
(a) to isolate it from the chromosome 
(b) to synthesize it chemically, and
(c) to make it from mRNA 
Genes can be isolated from the chromosomes by cutting the chrom osomes on the 
lanking sites of the gene using special enzymes known a s restriction endonucleases. 
If, however, the genes are small, they can also be synthe sized in the laboratory. 
Another very common method of getting the gene is to synthesize i t in the laboratory 
from messenger RNA, using reverse transcriptase. This DN A molecule is called 
complementary DNA (cDNA).
Molecular Scissors: Restriction Endonucleases 
    
 These are natural enzymes of bacteria, which they use for their own protection against 
viruses. The restriction enzyme cuts down the viral DNA, but does no harm to the 
bacterial chromosofhe. They are called restriction enzymes  because they restrict the 
growth of viruses. In 1970, Hamilton O. Smith, at Johns Hopki ns University, isolated the 
irst restriction enzyme. Bacteria produce a variety of such restriction enzymes, which 
cut the DNA at very speciic sites characterized by speciic  sequence of four or six 
nucleotides arranged symmetrically in the reverse order. Such sequences are known 
as palindromic sequences. So far more than 400 such enz ymes have been isolated out 
of which about 20 are frequently used in recombinant DNA te chnology.
EcoRl, a commonly used restriction enzyme, cuts double-stran ded DNA when it has 
this sequence of bases at the cleavage site (Fig. 23.1). Notice there is now a gap into 
which a piece of foreign DNA can be placed, if it ends in bases complementary to those
exposed by the restriction enzyme. The single stranded bu t complementary ends of the 
two DNA molecules are called “sticky ends” because they c an bind by complementary 
base pairing. They, therefore, facilitate the insertion of foreign DNA into vector DNA.423.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Molecular Carrier: Vector 
  
To make recombinant DNA, one often begins by selecting a vec tor, the means by 
which recombinant DNA is introduced into a host cell. One com mon type of vector 
is a plasmid. Plasmids were discovered by investigators s tudying the sex life of the 
intestinal bacterium Escherichia coli .
Plasmids are natural extra-chromosomal circular DNA molecu les which carry genes for 
antibiotic resistance and fertility etc. One of the plasmids  discovered earlier pSC 101 has 
antibiotic resistance gene for tetracycline, whereas pBR 3 22 has antibiotic resistance 
genes for tetracycline as well as ampicillin. Inserting  gene of interest in tetracycline 
resistant gene of plasmid pBR 322 would enable separatin g out colonies of bacteria in 
a medium containing ampicillin and vice versa.
Fig, 23.1 Restriction enzyme ECoRl, cuts this speciic se quence of nucleotides in such a way that sticky ends a re 
produced.523.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Recombinant DNA 
  
For preparation of a recombinant DNA, the plasmid is cut with  the same enzyme which 
was used for isolation of the gene of interest (Fig. 23.2). The gene of interest (insulin) 
is then joined with the sticky ends produced after cutting th e plasmid with the help of 
another special enzyme knqwn as DNA ligase. This enzym e seals the foreign piece of 
DNA into the vector. Now the two diferent pieces of DNA have been joined together, 
which is now known as recombinant DNA or chimaeric DNA 
 
Animation 23.1: Recombinant DNA
Source & Credit:Pinterest623.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 23.2 Cloning of a gene .723.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Expr ession of the Recombinant DNA 
   
 
A clone can be a large number of molecules (i.e. cloned  genes) or cells (i.e. cloned 
bacteria) or organisms that are identical to an original spe cimen. Fig. 23.3 compares the 
use of a plasmid and a virus to clone a gene. Bacterial c ells take up recombinant plasmid, 
especially, if they are treated with calcium chloride to m ake them more permeable. 
Thereafter, as the cell reproduces, a bacterial clone for ms and each new cell contains at 
least one plasmid. Therefore, each of the bacteria contains  the gene of interest, which 
will express itself and make a product. From this bacteri al clone, the cloned gene can 
be isolated for further analysis, or protein product can be separated (Fig 23.2). Besides 
plasmids, the DNA of bacterial viruses (for example, lamb da phage) can also be used 
as a vector. After lambda phage attaches to a host bacterium, recombinant DNA is 
released from the virus and enters the bacterium. Here, i t will direct the reproduction 
of many more viruses. Each virus in bacteriophage clone con tains a copy of the gene 
being cloned (Fig. 23.3).
Fig. 23.3 Plasmid DNA (upper part of igure) as well as viral  DNA (lower part of the igure) can be used as vectors for cloning gene 
of interes823.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Genoiftic Library 
A genome is a full set of genes of an individual. A genom ic library is a collection of 
bacterial or bacteriophage clones, each clone containing a particular segment of 
DNA from the source cell. For making a genomic library, a n organism’s DNA is simply 
sliced up into pieces, and pieces are put into vectors (i.e . plasmids or viruses) that are 
taken up by host bacteria as shown in Fig. 23.3. The enti re collection of bacterial or 
bacteriophage clones that result contains all the genes of tha t organism.
A particular probe can be used to search a genetic libra ry for a certain gene. A probe 
is a single stranded nucleotide sequence that will hybri dize (pair) with a certain piece 
of DNA. Location of the probe is possible because the probe is  either radioactive or 
luorescent. Bacterial cells, each carrying a particular  DNA fragment, can be plated onto 
agar in a petri dish. After the probe hybridizes into the gene of interest, the genes can 
be isolated from the fragment (Fig 23.4). Now this particul ar fragment can be cloned 
further or even analyzed for its particular DNA sequence.
Fig 23.4 Identiication of a cloned gene923.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Fig 23.5 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)1023.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
The polymer ase Chain Reaction
 
Kary B. Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction (P CR) in 1983. Earlier methods 
of obtaining multiple copies of a speciic sequence of DNA w ere time consuming and 
expensive. In contrast, PCR can create millions of copies of  a single gene or any speciic 
piece of DNA quickly in a test tube. PCR is very speciic - the targeted DNA sequence 
can be less than one part in a million of the total DNA sampl e. .This means that a single 
gene or smaller piece of DNA, among all the human genes can be ampliied (copied) 
using PCR.
PCR takes its name from DNA polymerase, the enzyme that car ries out DNA replication 
in a cell. It is considered a chain reaction because DNA  polymerase will carry out 
replication over and over again, until there are millions of copies of the desired DNA. 
PCR does not replace gene cloning, which is still used w henever a large quantity of 
gene or protein product is needed.
Before carrying out PCR, primers - sequences of about 20 bases that are complementary 
to the bases on either side of the “target DNA” - must be avail able. The primers are needed 
because DNA polymerase does not start the replication process;  it only continues or 
extends the process. After the primers bind by complementa ry base pairing to the 
DNA strand, DNA polymerase copies the target DNA (Fig 23.5) .
DNA polymerase used is temperature - insensitive (thermostab le) enzyme extracted 
from the bacterium Thermus aquaticus , which lives in hot springs. Commonly, this 
enzyme is also known as Taq polymerase . It can withstand high temperature, which is 
used to separate double stranded DNA, therefore, replication need not be interrupted 
by the need to add more enzyme. PCR is done these days in  an automatic PCR machine 
or thermocycler, which is a routine piece of equipment in any laboratory.
Animation 23.2 : PCR
Source & Credit: members.jcom1123.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
  Analyzing DNA 
  
The entire genome of an individual can be subjected to DNA inger printing, a process 
described in Fig. 23.6. The genome is treated with restr iction enzymes, which results 
in a unique collection of diferent sized fragments. There fore, restriction fragment 
length polymorphism (RFLPs) exists between individuals. Du ring a process called gel 
electrophoresis, the fragments can be separated according to their lengths (molecular 
weight or size), and the result is a number of bands that are so close together that 
they appear as a smear. However, the use of probes for gen etic markers produces a 
distinctive pattern that can be recorded on X-ray ilm.
Fif 23.6 DNA ingerprinting. Three samples of DNA(I , II , IIi )were cut with a restriction enzyme and run on agarose gel. T he 
gel pattren was then transferred to a membrane and DNA was d enatured. The denatured DNA on the paper was hybridized 
with radioactive probe. Since the radioactive probes and com plemetary arrangement of bases to the original DNA ,all DNA 
fragments were labelled , which appeared as black bands with autogradiagram.1223.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
   
The DNA from a single sperm enough to identify a suspected  rapist. Since DNA 
is inherited, its inger print resembles that of one’s pare nts. DNA inger printing 
successfully identiied the remains of a teenager who had  been murdered eight years 
before because the skeletal DNA was similar to that of the pa rent’s DNA. 
In Fig. 23.7 are given some DNA inger prints. The igure  23.7 (a) shows comparison of 
child’s inger print with that of his parents. The child h as received DNA from both of 
his parents. Arrows indicate that some bands in him are l ike his father, some like his 
mother. Some bands are. however, unique to him, which do not match with any of the 
parents. 
Fig. 23.7 (b) shows a case of disputed parenthood. Two per sons F1 and F2 claim to be the 
father of child C, whose mother’s inger print is given und er M. The child has received 
DNA from both of his parents. Obviously F1is not the real father.
The arrows on left side show common bands between mother and  child while those on 
right show common bands between the father and the child. 
Fig. 23.7(c) shows DNA inger prints which have been pre sented as forensic evidence. A 
criminal on a deserted place assaulted a woman. She scr atched his face in her defence 
but he murdered her and ran away. Forensic scientist re covered murder’s hair and skin 
cells from underneath her nails. They prepared DNA ing er prints from blood of victim, 
from murderer’s skin and hair, and from three suspects blood. Can you compare them 
for speciic DNA sequence and tell who is in guilty and w ho is not? The suspect 1 has 
inger prints, which is similar to linger print from skin  cells taken from underneath nails 
of the victim.Therefore suspect 1 is the culprit. The suspe ct 2 and 3 are not.
PCR ampliication and analysis can be used (1) to diagnos e viral infections, genetic 
disorders, and cancer (2) in forensic laboratories to iden tify criminals; and (3) to 
determine the evolutionary history’ of human population. It has been possible to 
sequence DNA taken from a 76,000 years old mummiied hum an braiti and from a 17 
to 20 million years old plant fossil following PCR ampliica tion.1323.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Fig 23.7(a) Comparison of a child’s DNA 
ingerprint (c) with his parent’s DNA  
fringerpints (Mand F),(b) DNA ingerprints as evidence for paternity . (c) DNA Test - a powerful tool of 
forensic science.
  Gene Sequencing 
In the late 1970s, methods were developed that allowed the nu cleotide sequence of 
any puriied DNA fragement to be determined simply and qu ickly. The main principle 
of these methods is : 
1. To generate pieces of DNA of diferent sizes all starting fr om the same point and 
ending at diferent points. 
2. Separation of these diferent pieces of DNA on agarose gel. 
3. Reading of sequence from the gel.1423.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
   
For generation of diferent sized DNA fragments, two methods ar c generally used. One 
is Sanger’s,method in which dideoxyribonucleoside triphosp hates arc used to terminate 
DNA synthesis at diferent sites. The other method is known as  Maxam-Giibcrt method 
in which DNA threads are chemically cut into pieces of di ferent sizes
Fig 23.8 The enzymatic or dideoxy method of sequencing DNA1523.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Fig 23.8 shows typical gel obtained after dideoxy method. T he volume of DNA sequence 
information is now so large that powerful computers must be us ed to store and analyze 
it. DNA sequence is now completely automated, robotic devices m ix the reagents and 
then load, run and read the order of the nucleotide bases f rom the gel. This is facilitated 
by using chain terminating nucleotides that are each labe lled with a diferent colored 
luorescent dye; in this case, all four synthesis reactions  can be performed in the same 
tube, and the products can be separated in a single lane  of a gel. A detector positioned 
near the bottom of the gel reads and records the color of luores cent label on each band 
as it passes through a laser beam. A computer then reads and stores this nucleotide 
sequence.
Owing to the automation of DNA sequencing, the genomes of many organisms have 
been sequenced. These include plant chloroplasts and an imal mitochondria, large 
number of bacteria, many of the yeasts, a nematode worm. Drosophila , the model plant 
Arabidopsis , the mouse and human. Researchers have also deduced the  complete DNA 
sequence of a variety of human pathogens.
THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT
  
The human genome project is massive efort originally founde d by the U.S. govern -
ment and now increasingly by U.S. pharmaceutical compani es to map the human 
chromosomes. Many non-proit and for proit biochemical laboratori es around the 
world are now involved in the project which has two primary g oals.
Animation 23.3: Human Genome Project
Source & Credit: CRDD1623.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Fig 23.9  Genetic map of X chromosomeThe irst goal is to construct a genetic map of the human genom e. The aim is to show 
the sequence of genes along the length of each type of chrom osome, such as de-
picted for the X chromosome in Fig 23.9. When the DNA seque nce of human chro-
mosome no. 22, one of the smallest human chromosomes, was comp leted in 19.99, 
it became possible for the irst time to see exactly how genes  are arranged along an 
entire vertebrate chromosome. With the publication of the entire human genome in 
2001, the genetic landscape of all human chromosomes sudd enly came into sharp 
focus. The sheer quantity of information provided by the huma n genome project is 
unprecedented in biology. The human genome is 25 times l arger than any other ge-
nome sequenced so far.1723.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
  
 The map for each chromosome is presently incomplete, and in many instances scientists 
rely on the placement of RFLPs. These sites eventually all ow scientist to pinpoint disease 
causing genes because a particular RFLP and a defecti ve gene are often inherited 
together. For example it is known that persons with Huntington d isease have a unique 
site where a restriction enzyme cuts DNA. The test for Huntin gton disease relies on this 
diference from the normal. 
The second goal is to construct a base sequence map. There  are three billion base 
pairs in the human genome and it is estimated it cohld take  an encyclopaedia of 200 
volumes, each with 1000 pages, to list all of these. Yet this  goal has been reached and 
all the chromosomes have been sequenced.
BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS 
    
Today bacteria, plants and animals are genetically engi neered to produce biotechnology 
products. Organisms that have a foreign gene inserted into th em are called  transgenic 
organisms.
Transgenic Bacteria 
Recombinant DNA technology is used to produce bacteria that rep roduce in large 
vats called bioreactors . If the foreign gene is replicated and actively express ed, a 
large amount of protein product can be obtained. Biotechnology p roducts produced 
by bacteria, such as insulin, human growth hormone, tissu e plasminogen activator, 
haemophilia factor Vm, and hepatitis B vaccine are now in the market.
Transgenic bacteria have been produced to promote health of p lants for example, 
bacteria that normally live on plants and encourage the forma tion of ice crystals have 
been changed from frost - plus to frost - minus bacteria. A lso, a bacterium that normally 
colonizes the roots of com plants has now been endowed with gen es (from another 
bacterium) that code for an insect toxin. The toxin protects the roots from insects. 
Bacteria can be selected for their ability to degrade a pa rticular substance and then 
this ability can be enhanced by genetic engineering. F or instance, naturally occurring 
bacteria may be engineered to do an even better job of clean ing up beaches after oil 
spills.1823.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
  
   Industry has found that bacteria can be used as bioilte rs to prevent airborne chemical 
pollutants from being vented into the air. They can also remove  sulfur from coal before 
it is burned and help to clean up toxic waste dumps. One such strain was given genes 
that allowed it to clean up levels of toxins that would have kill ed other strains. Further, 
these bacteria were given “suicide” genes that caused the m to self-destruct when the 
job had been accomplished.
     Organic chemicals are often synthesized by having catalysts act on precursor molecules 
or by using bacteria to carry out the synthesis. Today, it is  possible to go one step further 
and to manipulate the genes that code for these enzymes. For instance, biochemists 
discovered a strain of bacteria that is specially good at prod ucing phenylalanine; an 
organic chemical needed to make aspartame, the dipeptide sweetener better known 
as Nutrasweet. They isolated, altered and formed a vector for  the appropriate genes 
so that various bacteria could be genetically engineered to p roduce pucnylaianine. 
Many major mining companies already use bacteria to obtain  various metals. Genetic 
engineering may enhance the ability of bacteria to extract copper, uranium and gold 
from low grade sources. Some mining companies are testing genetically engineered 
organisms that have improved bioleaching capabilities.
Animation 23.4: Transgenic Bectria
Source & Credit: 33rd Square1923.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Transgenic Plants 
  
Techniques have been developed to introduce foreign genes i nto immature plant 
embryos, or into plant cells that have had the cell wall rem oved and are called 
protoplasts.  It is possible to treat protoplasts with an electric current wh ile they are 
suspended in a liquid containing foreign DNA. The electr ic current makes tiny, selfscaling 
holes in the plasma membrane through which genetic materi al can enter. Then a 
protoplast will develop into a complete plant. Foreign genes tra nsferred to cotton, com 
and potato strains have made these plants resistant to pests bec ause their cells now 
produce an insect’toxin. Similarly, soybeans have been ma de resistant to a common 
herbicide. Some corn and cotton plants are both pest and herb icide resistant. In 1999 
these transgenic crops were planted on more than 70 million  acres worldwide and the 
acreage is expected to triple in about ive years. Improvemen ts still to come for are 
increased protein or starch content and modiied oil or amino a cid composition.
  
Animation 23.5:Transgenic Plants
Source & Credit: Wikipedia2023.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Agribusiness companies also are in the process of developi ng transgenic versions 
of wheat and rice in addition to com. This is considered an  absolute necessity if the 
2020 global demand for rice, wheat and com is to be met. W orld grain harvests have 
continued to rise since the 1960s when special high-yiel d hybrid plants were developed 
during the so called green revolution. But the per capita pr oduction has now lattened 
out because of continued population growth. The hope is that ge netic engineering will 
allow fanners to surpass the yield barrier. Perhaps, the  stomata, the pore-like openings 
in the leaves, could be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water loss. 
Another possible goal is to increase the eiciency of the enz yme Rubisco which captures 
C02 in most plants. A team of Japanese scientists are attemp ting to introduce the C4 
cycle into the rice. Plants that utilize the C4 cycle avoid th e ineiciency of carboxylase 
by using a diferent means of capturing C02. Unlike the s ingle gene transfers that have 
been done so far, these modiications would require a thorough  re-engineering of 
plant cells. Single gene transfers will cause plants to produce various products. A weed 
called mouse-eared cress has been engineered to produce  a biodegradable plastic 
(polyhydroxy-butyrate) in cell granules.
Plants are being engineered to produce human hormones, cl otting factors, and 
antibodies in their seeds. One type of antibody made by com  can deliver radio 
isotopes to tumor cells, and another made by soybeans can be used as treatment for 
genital herpes. Plant-made antibodies are inexpensive an d there is little worry about 
contamination with pathogens that could infect people. Clinical  trials have begun. 
Transgenic Animals 
Techniques have been developed to insert genes into the eggs  of animals. It is possible 
to micro eggs by hand, but another method uses vortex mixing. The eggs and silicon - 
carbide needles, and the needles make DNA can enter. W hen these eggs are fertilized, 
the resulting ofspring are transgenic animals. Using this  technique many types of animal 
eggs have taken up the gene for bovine growth hormone. The pr ocedure has been 
used to produce larger ishes’, cows, pigs, rabbits and s heep. Genetically engineered 
ishes are now being kept in ponds that ofer no escape to the wild because there is 
much concern that they will upset or destroy natural ecosystem s.2123.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
(a) This goat is genetically engineered to produce 
antithrobin III , which is secreted in her milk
(b) The procedure to produce a 
transgenic animal.
(c) The procedure to clone a 
transgenic animal
Gene pharming, the’ use of transgenic farm animals to prod uce pharmaceuticals is 
being pursued by a number of irms. Genes that code for the rapeutic, and diagnostic 
proteins are incorporated into the animal’s DNA, and the protei ns appear in the animal’s 
milk. There are plans to produce drugs for the treatment of cystic ibrosis, cancer, blood 
diseases and other disorders. Antithrombin III, for preventi ng blood clot during surgery, 
is currently being produced by a herd of goats, and clin ical trials have begun. Figure 
23.10 out lines the procedure of producing transgenic mamm als. DNA containing the 
gene of interest is injected into donor eggs. Following in vitr o fertilization, the zygotes 
are placed in host females where they develop. After fema le ofspring mature, the 
product is secreted in the milk. The scientists of United Sta tes Department2223.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab 
of Agriculture have been able to genetically engineer mic e to produce human growth 
hormone in their urine instead of in milk. They expect to b e able to use the same 
technique on larger animals. Urine is a preferable vehi cle for a biotechnology product 
than milk because all animals in a herd urinate - only  females produce milk; animals 
start to urinate at birth - females don’t produce milk until m aturity; and its easier to 
extract proteins from urine than from milk.
Cloning of Transgenic Animals 
Imagine that an animal has been genetically engineered  to produce a biotechnology 
product. What would be the best possible method of getting iden tical copies of the 
animals? Asexual reproduction through cloning the animal w ould be the preferred 
procedure to use. Cloning is a form of asexual reproduction because it requires only 
the genes of that one animal. For many years it was believe d that adult vertebrate 
animals could not be cloned. Although each cell contains a copy of all the genes certain 
genes are turned of in mature specialized cells. Difere nt genes are expressed in 
muscle cells, which contract, compared to nerve cells, whi ch conduct nerve impulses 
and to glandular cells, which secrete. Cloning of an adu lt vertebrate requires that all 
genes of an adult cells be turned on again if development is to proceed normally. It had 
long been thought this would be impossible. In 1997, scien tists at the Roslin Institute 
in Scotland announced that they achieved this feat and had p roduced a cloned sheep 
called Dolly.
Since then calves and goats have been cloned. Figure 23.1 0 shows that after 
enucleated eggs have been injected with 2n nuclei of adu lt cells, they can be 
coaxed to begin development. The ofspring have the genotype an d phenotype 
of the adult that donated the nuclei; therefore, the adult has been cloned. In the 
procedure that produced cloned mice, the 2n nuclei were ta ken from cumulus cells. 
Cumulus cells are those that cling to an egg after ovulation oc curs. A specially prepared 
chemical bath was used to stimulate the eggs to divide and b egin development. Now 
that scientists have a method to clone mammals, this procedure will undoubtedly 
be used routinely. In the United States, a presidential orde r prohibits the cloning of 
humans. But certain other countries are experimenting with the possibility.2323.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
GENE THERAPY 
    
Gene therapy is the insertion of genetic material into human cells for the treatment 
of a disorder. It includes procedures that give a patient he althy genes to make up for 
faulty genes and also includes the use of genes to treat var ious other human illnesses 
such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
There are two main methods used for gene therapy Ex-vivo and  in vivo. Ex- vivo 
gene therapy  is shown in Fig. 23.11. in which childr en in the severe combined 
immunodeiciency syndrome (SCID) is treated. These childr en lack an enzyme 
adenosine deaminase (ADA) that is involved in the maturation of  T and B cells and, 
therefore, they are subjected to life threatening infections.  Bone marrow stem cells 
are removed from the blood and infected with a retrovirus (RNA  virus) that carries a 
normal gene for the enzyme then the cells are returned to th e patient. Bone marrow 
stem cells are preferred for this procedure, because the y divide to produce more cells 
with same genes. Patients who have undergone this procedure  do have a signiicant 
improvement in their immune function that is associated with a  sustained rise in the 
level of ADA enzyme activity in the bloodAnimation 23.6: Gene Therapy
Source & Credit: Ethris2423.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
    
Among the many gene therapy trials, one is for the treatment of familial 
hypercholesterolemia a condition that develops when liver cell s lack a receptor for 
removing cholesterol from the blood. The high levels of blood ch olesterol make the 
patient subject to fatal heart attacks at a young age. In a ne wly developed procedure, a 
small portion of the liver is surgically excised and infe cted with a retrovirus containing 
a normal gene for the receptor. Several patients have experi enced a lowering of serum 
cholesterol levels following this procedure.
Fig 23.11 Ex vivo gene therapy in human2523.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
     
Cystic ibrosis patients lack a gene that codes for trans-mem brane carrier of the 
chloride ion. Patients often die due to numerous infections of the respiratory tract. 
And in vivo method of treatment is being tried. Liposomes-micros copic vesicles that 
spontaneously form when lipoproteins are put into a solution, ha ve been coated with 
the gene needed to cure cystic ibrosis. Then the solution is  sprayed into patient’s 
nostrils. Due to limited gene transfer, this methodology has not as yet been successful.           
     Gene therapy is also being done to cancer patients, wh ich makes them more tolerant 
of chemotherapy. In clinical trials researchers have give n genes to cancer patient 
that either make healthy cells more tolerant of chemotherapy or  make tumors more 
vulnerable to it. Once the bone marrow stem cells were protec ted it was possible to 
increase the level of chemotherapy to kill the cancer cells .
   During coronary artery angioplasty, a balloon catheter is sometimes used to open 
up a closed artery. Unfortunately, the artery has a tendency  to close up once again. 
But investigators have come up with a new procedure. The bal loon is coated with a 
plasmid that contains a gene for vascular endothelial growth factor. The expression of 
the gene, which promotes the proliferation of blood vessels to by pass the obstructed 
area, has been observed in at least one patient.
  Perhaps it will be possible to used in vivo therapy to cure  hemophilia, diabetes. 
Parkinson disease, or AIDS. To treat hemophilia, patients cou ld get regular doses of cells 
that contain normal clotting-factor genes or such cells could b e placed in organoids, 
artiicial organs that can be implanted in the abdominal ca vity. To cure Parkinson’s 
disease, dopamine-producing cells could be grafted dire ctly into the brain.
TISSUE CULTURE 
Tissue culture is the growth of a tissue in an artiicial l iquid culture medium. German 
botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt said in 1902 that plant cells are  totipotent - each cell has 
the full genetic potential of the organism - and, therefore, a single cell could become 
a complete plant. But it wasn’t until 1958 that Cornell botanis t F.C. Steward grew a 
complete carrot plant from a tiny piece of phloem. He provided  the cells with sugars, 
minerals and vitamins, but he also added coconut milk. (La ter it was discovered that 
coconut milk contains the plant hormone cytokinin). When the cu ltured cells began 
dividing, they produced a callus, an undiferentiated grou p of cells.2623.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
    
Then the callus diferentiated into shoot and roots and developed  into a complete 
plant.
 Tissue culture techniques have by now led to micropropagati on, a commercial method 
of producing thousands, even millions of identical seedling s in a limited amount of 
space. One favourite method to accomplish micro propagation is by meristem culture. 
If the correct proportions of auxins and cytokinin are added to a liquid medium, many 
new shoots will develop from a single shoot tip. When these ar e removed more shoots 
form. Since the shoots are genetically identical the adult p lants that develop from them 
are called clonal plants, all having the same traits. Anoth er advantage of meristem 
culture is that meristem, unlike other portions of a plant, is  virus free, therefore the 
plants produced are also virus free (The presence of pla nt viruses weakens plants and 
makes them less productive).
    Because plants are totipotent, it should be possible to grow  an entire plant from 
a single cell. This, too has been done. Enzymes are use d to digest the cell walls of a 
small piece of tissue, usually mesophyll tissue, from a leaf, and the result is naked 
cells without walls, called protoplasts. The protoplasts regen erate a new cell wall 
and begin to divide. These clumps of cells can be manip ulated to produce somatic 
embiyos. Somatic embryos that are encapsulated in a protective  hydrated gel (and 
sometimes called artiicial seeds) can be shipped everyw here. It is possible to produce 
millions of somatic embryos at once in large tanks called b ioreactors. This is done for 
certain vegetables like tomato, celery, asparagus and for or namental plants like lilies, 
begonias and African violets. A mature plant develops from e ach somatic embryo. 
Plants generated from the somatic embryo vary somewhat becaus e of mutations that 
arise; dunng the production process. These so called somac lonal variations are another 
way to produce new plants with desired traits.
Anther culture is a technique in which mature anthers ar e cultured in a medium 
containing vitamins and growth regulators. The haploid tube c ells with in the pollen 
grains divide, producing proembryos consisting of as many as 20 to 40 cells. Finally the 
pollen grains rupture releasing haploid embryos. The ex perimenter can now generate a 
haploid plant, or chemical agent can be added that encoura ges chromosomal doubling. 
After chromosomal doubling the resulting plants are diploid but homozygous for all 
their alleles. Anther culture is a direct way to produce p lants that express recessive 
alleles. If the recessive alleles govern desirable traits , the plants have these traits.2723.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
    
The culturing of plant tissues has led to a technique call ed cell suspension culture. 
Rapidly growing cultures are cut into small pieces and s haken in’a liquid nutrient medium 
so that single cells or small clumps of cells break of an d form a suspension. These 
cells will produce the same chemicals as the entire pla nt. For example cell suspension 
cultures of Cinchona ledgeriana produce quinine and those  of Digitalis lanata produce 
digitoxin. Scientists envision that it will be possible to main tain cell suspension cultures 
in bioreactors for the purpose of producing chemicals used in the production of drugs, 
cosmetics and agricultural chemicals. If so, it will no l onger be necessary to farm plants 
for the purpose of acquiring the chemicals they produce.
 
Genetic Engineering of Plants 
   
Traditionally, hybridization, the crossing of diferent varie ties of plants or even species, 
was used to produce plants with desirable traits. Hybridiz ation, followed by vegetative 
propagation of the mature plants, generated a large number of identical plants with 
these traits. Today it is possible to directly alter the genes  of organisms. Transgenic 
plants carry a foreign gene that has been introduced into th eir cells so that they have 
new and diferent traits.
Since a whole plant will grow from a protoplast, it is neces sary only to place the foreign 
gene into a living- protoplast. A foreign gene isolated from a ny type of organism is 
placed in the tissue culture medium.
High-voltage electric pulses can then be used to create pore s in the plasma membrane 
so that the DNA enters. In one of the irst procedures carried out, a gene for the 
production of the irely enzyme luciferase was inserted in to tobacco protoplast and 
the adult plants glowed when sprayed with the substrate luc iferin (Fig. 23.12).2823.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Unfortunately, the regeneration of cereal grains from protoplas ts has been diicult. 
Com and wheat protoplasts produce infertile plants. As a res ult, other methods are 
used to introduce DNA into plant cells with intact cell wall. In one technique, foreign 
DNA is inserted into the plasmid of the bacterium Agrobacterium,  which normally infects 
the plant cells. A plasmid can be used to produce’ recomb inant DNA. Recombinant 
DNA contains genes from diferent sources, namely those of pl asmids and the foreign 
genes of interest. When the bacterium infects the plant the recombinant plasmid is 
introduced into the plant cells (Fig.23.12). In 1987, John  C Sanford and Theodore M. 
Klein of Cornell University developed another method of introduci ng DNA into a plant 
tissue culture callus.Fig 23.12 Tabacoo plant containing Luciferase gene glows when  sprayed with luciferin2923.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
They constructed a device, called the particle gun, that bom bards a callus with DNA 
coated microscopic metal particles. Then genetically altere d somatic embryos develop 
into genetically adult plants. Many plants including com a nd wheat varieties have been 
genetically engineered by this method.
Agricultur al Plants with Improved Traits 
Cotton, com, potato and soybean plants have been engineered to be  resistant to either 
insect predation or herbicides that are judged to be environm entally safe. Some com 
and cotton plants have been produced that are both insect and h erbicide resistant. 
In 1999, transgenic crops were planted on more that 70 mil lion acres world wide and 
the acreage is expected to triple in about ive years. If cr ops are resistant to a broad-
spectrum herbicide and weeds are not then the herbicide can be used to kill the weeds. 
When herbicide resistant plants were planted weeds were  easily controlled, less tillage 
was needed and soil erosion was minimized.
   One aim of genetic engineering is to produce crops that have the improved agricultural 
or food quality traits such as those listed in the table below:
Improved Agricultural Traits
Herbicide resistant Wheat, rice, sugar beets, canola
Salt tolerant Cereals, rice, sugarcane
Drought tolerant Cereals, rice, sugarcane
Cold tolerant Cereals, rice, sugarcane
Improved yield Cereals, rice, com, cotton
Modiied wood pulp Trees
Improved Food Quality Traits
Fatty acid / oil content Com, soybeans
Protein / starch content Cereals, potatoes, soybeans, rice, com
Amino acid content Com, soybean
Disease protected Wheat, com, potatoes3023.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Production of salt tolerant plants had been a dream of genetic  engineer. Recently 
salt - tolerant  Arabidopsis  has been produced. For this the scientists irst identiied 
a gene coding for a channel protein that transports Na+ along  with H+ across a 
vacuole membrane. Isolating Na+ in a vacuole prevents it from  interfering with plant 
metabolism. Then, the scientists cloned the gene and used it to genetically engineer 
plants that overproduce the channel protein. The modiied plan ts thrived when 
watered with a salty solution. Irrigation, even into fresh wate r, inevitably leads to a 
salinization of soil that reduces crop yields. Today, crop p roduction is limited by efects 
of salinization at about 50% of irrigated levels. The next ste p to solve this problem is 
to produce salt - tolerant crops. It is believed that the producti on not only of salt - but 
also drought and cold tolerant crops will reduce the need for  added farm acreage by 
increasing agricultural yields that will provide enough f ood for a world population 
that is expected to nearly double by 2050.
Some progress has also been made to increase the food quali ty of crops. Soybeans 
have been developed that mainly produce the monounsaturated fa tty acid, oleic acid, 
a change that may improve human health. These altered pla nts also produce vernolic 
acid and ricinoleic acid, derivatives of oleic acid that ca n be used as hardenes in paints 
and plastics. The necessary genes were derived from Ve monia and castor bean seeds 
and were transferred into the soybean genomes.
Genetic Engineering is also expected to increase productivity . To that end, stomata 
might be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water  loss. The eiciency 
of the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which captures C02 in pl ants could be improved. A 
team of Japanese scientists is working on introduc ing the C 4 photosynthetic cycle into 
rice. Unlike C3 plants, C4 plants do well in hot dry weath er. These modiications would 
require a more complete engineering of plant cells than th e single gene transfers’ that 
have been done so far.3123.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Production of Products 
Single gene transfers have allowed plants to produce various  products such as human 
hormones, clotting factors and antibodies. One type of antibody made by com can 
deliver radioisotopes to tumor cells and another made by soybea ns can be used as 
treatment for genital herpes clinical triats have begun.
Recently, a group of scientists from Biosource Technologies l ocated in Vacaville, 
California reported that they have been able to use the tobacco mosaic virus as a 
vector to introduce a human gene into adult tobacco plants in the ield. Note that 
this technology by passes the need for tissue culture comple tely. Tens of grams of 
a-galactosidase, an enzyme that can be used to treat a huma n lysosome storage 
disease, were harvested per acre of tobacco plants. And it only took thirty days to 
get tobacco plants to produce antigens to treat non-Hodgkin’s lymp homa after being 
sprayed with a genetically engineered vims.
EXERCISE
  
 Q.1. Fill in the blanks.
1. The use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) creates a ___ ______ of copies in a laboratory 
test tube. 
2. ___________free living organisms in the environment that ha ve had a foreign gene 
inserted into them. 
3. __________known sequences of DNA that are used to ind compl ementary DNA 
strands; can be used diagnostically to determine the prese nce of particular gene.   
4. ___________production of many identical copies of a gen e. 
5. ___________self duplicating ring of accessory DNA in  the cytoplasm of bacteria.3223.Biotechnology eLearn.Punjab
Q.3. Short questions.
1. How and why transgenic animals that secrete a product are often cloned? 
2. Explain two primary goals of Human Genome Project. What are possible beneits of 
the project? 
3. Explain and give examples of ex vivo and in vivo gene therap ies in humans?
Q.4.  Extensive questions.
1. What is the methodology for producing recombinant DNA to be used  in gene cloning?
2.  What is a genomic library, how would you locate a gene^of.i nterest in the library? 
3. What is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), amftow is it c arried out to produce 
multiple copies of a DNA segment? 
4. What is DNA inger printing, a process that utilizes the enti re genome? 
5. For what purpose have bacteria, plants and animals been g enetically altered?-