CHAPTER
  18Reproduction
Animation.18: reproduction
Source & Credit: wikispaces218. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Every species of organisms can reproduce new individuals of tha t species. In organisms, methods 
of reproduction are varied and some are quite complex. It is very im portant to the survival of 
a species or a population. Reproduction is the mechanism that- prod uces new generations and 
maintains a species-population.
                                
Reproduction is of two types, asexual reproduction and sexual repr oduction. Asexual reproduction 
requires only a single parental organism which gives rise to ofs pring by mitotic cell division, during 
which the total chromosomes content of the cell is exactly replicated and  passed on to daugher 
cells, so that the ofspring are genetically identical to the parent. M ethods of asexual reproduction 
are ission, sporulation, budding, vegetative propagation, artiicial  propagation, parthenogenesis 
and apomixis etc.
                                
Sexual reproduction usually involves two parents. A fertilized egg i s produced through the union of 
meiotically produced specialized sex cells (egg and sperm) from  each parent. Meiosis or reduction 
division gives rise to    gametes (gametogenesis) in which not only th e chromosome number is 
halved (haploid) but reshuling of genes leads to recombination of g enes. This not only maintains 
the chromosome number in a species but also produces genetic variation s, an important factor in 
the survival and adaptation of a species or a population (Fig. 1 8.1).
In plants, if there isalternationof generations namely a diploid sporophyte and a haploid 
gametophyte, meiosis occurs during spore formation (sporogenesis).
                  
In asexual reproduction, although increase in number of genetical ly alike individuals from a parent 
is very rapid but this is not an adaptive method and may at some s tage jeopardize the survival of 
a species. Man has favoured this type of reproduction for his own needs, commonly in plants but 
now tissue culture technique in plants and cloning in animals  are being adopted for producing 
organisms of valuable characteristics, without a change in their  genetic make up. Cloning has been 
practised successfully but its disadvantages like rapid agin g and low resistance to environmental 
stress and diseases are still the limitations for commercial ventures . Also it is still not being accepted 
socially and morally in general.318. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Evolution of pollen tube is an important step in 
land adaptation by the spermatophytes. Pollen 
tube acts as vehicle for male gametes for their 
safe transport to female gamete in ovule in 
hostile land environment. Evolution of pollen 
tube is parallel to the evolution of seed and is 
a tool of success for seed plants.REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS
         
  
In plants both sexual and asexual reproduction are foun. I n asexual reproduction 
layering, grafting, budding etc. are the artiicial modes .
In sexual reproduction, plants have diplohaplontic life cycle with alternating diploid sporophyte 
and haploid gametophyte generations. If the 
two generations are vegetatively similar, such 
alternation of generations is referred to as 
isomorphic, and if they are dissimilar it is called 
heteromorphic.
Seed plants are predominatly present 
all around us due to their better sexual 
reproduction, modiication of lower and 
inloresence for pollination, involving 
gamete transfer by pollen tubes,food storage for developing em bryo, protection by 
seed coats and dispersal with the help of fruit formation (a ngiosperms). Seeds are 
capable of enduring unfavourable conditions in dormant form (seed dormancy) and 
as soon as, conditions become favourable for establishing the seedling, it germinates.  
Animation 181:Reproduction
Source & Credit: Ameoba Sisters418. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 18.1 (a) Bryophyte life cycle. Note that the sporophyt e is completely dependent upon the gametophyte.518. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 18.1 (b) Spermatophyte life cycles (i) Gymnosperm li fe cycle, Pinus sylvestris (Class Pinatae). (ii) Angiosp erm life 
cycle.618. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
18.1 (ii) Angiosperm life cycle718. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Parth enocarpy
                     
In some cases, fruit development proceeds without fertilization and thus  no seed formation takes 
place e.g. banana, pineapples and some varieties of oranges and grapes. Such development is 
called parthenocarpy. It is due to hormonal imbalance; usually  high auxin levels occur in these 
ovaries. Parthenocarpy is sometime artiicially induced for commerc ial purposes, by adding auxins 
in tomato, peppers etc.
Seed Dormancy
                                
It is the special condition of rest, which enables an embryo to sur vive  long periods of unfavourable 
environmental conditions, such as water scarcity or low temperature. During this period of rest 
the embryo ceases or limits its growth. This is of great survival i mportance to the plant in that it 
prevents the dormant seed from germinating in response to conditions suc h as a warm spell in 
winter. Germination or resumption of normal growth by a dormant embr yo requires certain, very 
precise combinations of environmental cues, to avoid any accidental s timulus which may prove 
fatal later on.
Fruit set and Fruit ripening
Germinating pollen grain is not only an important structure for  safe transfer of 
gametes and insurance for fertilization but also a rich sou rce of auxins as well as 
commonly stimulating the tissues of the style and ovary to produc e more auxin. This 
auxin is necessary for ‘fruit set’, i.e. retention of the ova ry, which becomes the fruit 
after fertilization. Without it abscission of lowers normally oc curs, leading to low fruit 
yields. After fertilization, the ovary and the ripe seeds c ontinue to produce auxins which 
stimulate fruit development. Developing seeds are not only a ri ch source of auxins and 
gibberellins, but also of cytokinins.818. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
These growth substances are mainly associated with developm ent of the embryo and 
accumulation of food reserves in the seed and some times in the pericarp (fruit wall).
Fruit ripening is often accompanied by a burst of respira tory activity called the climacteric.
This is associated with ethane production, which helps in ripening of the fruit.
    
Photoperiodism
Apart from photosynthesis and phototropic responses, another very important way in 
which light exerts its inluence on living organisms is thr ough variations in day length 
called photoperiod. In plants, photoperiod and temperature afe ct lowering, fruit and 
seed production, bud and seed dormancy, leaf fall and g ermination.
Photoperiod afects lowering, when shoot meristems start producin g loral buds 
instead of leaves and lateral buds.
Efect of photoperiodism was irst studied in 1920 by Garner a nd Allard. They studied 
that tobacco plant lowers only after exposure to a series of shor t days. Tobacco plant 
naturally lowers under same conditions, in autumn, but lowe ring could be induced 
by conditions artiicially to short days exposing. With further  studies they were able 
to classify lowering plants into long-day plants, which req uire long days for lowering 
and day-neutral plants lower without being inluenced by p hotoperiod.
Later on, further studies indicated that it is really the le ngth of the dark period which 
is critical. Thus short-day plants are really long-night plants. If they are grown in short 
days, but the long night is interrupted by a short light per iod, lowering is prevented. 
Long-day plants will lower in short days if the long night period is interrupted (Table 
18.1)
Animation 181:Photoperiodism
Source & Credit: Leaving BIo918. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Table 18.1 (b) Some phytochrome-controlled responses in plant s.
General process efected Red light promotes
PhotoperiodismStimulates lowering in long-day plants. 
Inhibits lowering in short-day plants. 
See lowering.Table 18.1 (a) Classiication of plants according to photoperi odic requirements for lowering
Short-day plants (SDPs  Long-day plants (LDPs) Day-neutaral plants (DNPs)
Flowering induced by dark 
periods longer than a critical 
length, e.g. cocklebur 8.5 h; 
tobacco 10-11h.
(Under natural conditions 
equivalent to days shorter 
than a critical length, e.g. 
cocklebur 15.5 h; tobacco 
13- 14h)
e.g. cocklebur (Xanthium), 
chrysanthemum, soyabean, 
tobacco, strawberryFlowering induced by dark 
periods shorter than a 
critical length, e.g. henbane 
13h.
(Under natural conditions 
equivalent to days longer 
than a critical length, e.g. 
henbane 11 h).
e.g. henbane (Hyoscyamus 
niger), snapdragon, 
cabbage, spring wheat, 
spring barley.Flowering indepenedent 
of photoperiod.
e.g. cucumber, tomato, 
garden pea, maize, cotton.1018. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Further experimentation also revealed that quantity of light is also in luenced by the quality of 
light. Cocklebur, a short day plant, will not lower if its long  night is interrupted but experiments 
revealed that red light was efective in preventing lowering and far-red  light reversed the efect of 
red light. It was also demonstrated that the last light treatment alwa ys determines the response. 
This response to light intensity and quality led to the discovery of b lue pigment that is red light 
sensitive protein, the phytochromes.
Phytochrome exists in two forms i.e. P 660 and P 730. P 660 a  quiscent form absorbs red light at a 
wave length of 660 nm and is converted to active P 730, P 730 absor bs far red light at 730 nm and 
is converted to P 660. In nature, the P 660 to P 730 conversion takes place in day light and P 730 
to P 660 conversion occurs in the dark. Thus during the day a plant has P 730 phytochromes while 
during the night it contains more phytochromes in the form of P 66 0. The presence of either form 
provides the plants with a means of detecting whether it is in a lig ht or dark environment. The rate 
at which P 730 is converted to P 660 provides the plant with a “cl ock” for measuring the duration 
of darkness.
It has been found that red light inhibits lowering the short day p lants but promotes lowering in 
long day plants, under conditions during which lowering norm ally takes place. This observation led 
to hypothesize that the P730-P660 interconversion might be the lant time -  regulator for lowering. 
According to this hhypothesis, p 730, converted from P 660 by the absorption of red light, would 
inhibit lowering in short day plants but promote lowering in long  day plants. Because P 730 
accumulates in the day and diminishes at night, short day pl ants coud lower only if the night were 
long enough, during which a great amount of P730 would not be c ompletely inactivated, so that 
enough P 730 would remain at the end of night to promote lowering. Bu t now it is generally agreed 
that the time measuring phenomenon of lowering is not totally controlled b y the interconversion 
of P 660 to P 730. Other factors, like presence or absence of ligh t and length  of dark, or light 
period also play an important role in lowering. Phytochromes seems to be responsible for the 
detection of either light or darkness. The biological clock once stimu lated causes production of 
lorigen hormone in leaves, which travels through phloem to the loral bu ds, initiating lowering.
Vernalisation
Biennials and perennial plants are stimulated to lowering  by exposure to low 
temperature. This is called vernalisation . The low temperature stimulus is received 
by the shoot apex of a mature stem or embryo of the seed but not by the leaves as in 
photoperiodism.1118. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
 
For some plants, vernalisation is an absolute requirement or in some cases it simply 
assists in inducing lowering. The duration of low temperatu re (chilling) treatment 
required varies from four days to three months.
Temperature around 4°C is found to be very efective. It stimu lates the production 
of “vernalin” hormone which induces vernalisation, it is now  believed that vemalin is 
nothing special but actually is gibberellin.
Photoperiodism and vernalisation serve to synchronise the reprod uctive behaviour of 
plants with their environment, ensuring reproduction at favoura ble times of year. They 
also ensure that members of the same species lower at the s ame time, encouraging 
cross pollination for genetic variability.
REPRODUCTION IN ANIMALS
Animals like plants also reproduce both asexually as well as sexually. But asexual reproduction 
is less common in animals as compared to plants. Binary iss ion, multiple ission (animal like 
protoctists) budding (Hydra) parthenogenesis, tissue culturing, cloning and identical twins are the 
common asexual methods of reproduction.
In honeybee males are haploid and produce sperms by mitosis.1218. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
 Asexual Repr oduction
               
 
Parthenogenesis is deined as the development of an egg without fertilizati on, ants, bees and 
wasps are good examples. In the honeybees, males (or drones) develop f rom unfertilized eggs. 
The queen bee, though carrying male gametes from male, has the abi lity to lay eggs that have not 
been fertilized. The sperms she receives from a drone bee are stored in a pouch closed of by a 
valve. The eggs may be fertilized or may not be fertilized from the stor ed sperms. The haploid egg 
develop into haploid ofspring, it is called haploid parthenogensis .
In some cases e.g. in aphids, diploid parthenogenesis may occu r, in which the egg- producing cells of 
the female, undergo a modiied form of meiosis involving total non-dis juction of the chromosomes, 
they retain the diploid number of chromosome. Egg (diploid) develops into young females.
Parthenogenesis has the advantage of accelerating the normal reproducti ve rate.
TISSUE CULTURING AND CLONING
In tissue culturing technique in plants, cambium tissue excis ed from plants can be stimulated by the 
addition of nutrients, cytokinins, and IAA (indole acetic acid) . These cells show continuous growth 
and diferentiate into a new plant, genetically identical to their par ents.
Tissue culture is now widely used for the rapid propagation of d esired varieties or for varieties 
diicult to propagate by cuttings. Similar techniques have been develop ed for the tissue culture of 
animal cells.
In lowering plants, one form of parthenogenesis is called apomixi s. In this a diploid cell of 
the ovule, either from the nucellus or megaspore, develops into a functiona l embryo in the 
absence of a male gamete. The rest of the ovule develops into the seed and the ovary into the 
fruit.1318. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Organisms produced from a single cell by subculturing (cloning) are called clones. In 
animals and especially among vertebrates, a nucleus from  the somatic cell is removed 
and introduced into an egg cell, whose own nucleus has be en destroyed by ultra violet 
radiation. The egg with transplanted diploid somatic cell n ucleus develops into an 
organism, genetically identical to the parent who has contrib uted the nucleus.
The cloning of desirable animals such as prize bulls, rac e horses etc. might be as useful as cloning 
of useful varieties of plants.
However, the application of the technique to humans would be open to seriou s moral questions. 
Theoretically any number of genetically identical copies of the sam e man or woman might be made.
The use of cloned cells allows the quantitative study of the action of h ormones, drugs and antibodies 
to be made on cells. Such a technique is a useful substitute for i nvestigating the efect of drugs, 
cosmetics and pharmaceutical products on animal cells without ex posing laboratory animals to 
these chemicals.
Cloning has the advantage that all the ofspring behave similarly,  but  if an environmental hazard 
develop (like an out break of a disease), non resistant strains are present to lessen the impact. Also 
the degree to which environment inluences clone development is not fully k nown and any cloned 
cell would have to go through all the phases of development once again i ncluding embryo, fetus, 
baby and child hood (in case of human beings).
IDENTICAL TWINS
In higher vertebrates including man, zygote after fertilization und ergoes cleavage (cell division by 
mitosis). When embryo is at two celled stage, the two blastomeres, instea d of remaining together, 
may separate and behave as two independent zygotes, each giving rise to a new individual. Both 
the organisms are products of mitosis, thus they have identical geneti c make up and are called 
identical twins. They are produced mitotically (asexually).
In some cases, more than one egg is produced by the female and all  these eggs are independently 
fertilized forming two or more zygote. These zygotes develop into new ofspri ngs, but with diferent 
genetic combinations. Such a twins or triplets are called fraterna l twins or triplets. They are produced 
sexually.1418. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
It is thought that asexual method of reproduction is a primitive form  of reproduction than the 
sexual reproduction. At a later stage, a mechanism have evolved leadin g to production and union 
of gametes. Meiosis and genetic recombination played a major role in  the development of more 
complex forms of life and types of gametes, from identical game tes (isogametes) to the heterogametic 
stage of motile male gametes (sperms or antherozoid) and non-motile fema le gametes eggs (ova). 
Sexual reproduction has advantage over asexual reproduction which i s elaborated in the following 
table 18.2.
Asexual reproduction Sexual reproduction (omitting bacteria)
One parent only.
No gametes are produced.
Meiosis absent.
Ofsprings identical to parent.
Commonly occurs in plants, less 
diferentiated animals and micro-
organisms Absent in more diferentiated 
animals.
Often results in rapid production of large 
number of ofsprings.Usually two parents.
Gametes are produced. These are 
haploid and nuclei of two gametes fuse 
(fertilization) to form a diploid zygote.
Meiosis is present at some stage in life 
cycle to prevent chromosome doubling in 
every generation.
Ofsprings are not identical to parents. 
They show genetic variation as a result of 
genetic recombination
Occurs in the majority of plant and animal 
species.
Less rapid increase in number.Table 18.21518. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
External fertilization occurs in aquatic environment where male gam etes can swim towards the 
female-gametes in water medium. Development is also external due to the cons tant / stable 
conditions of water (frog, ish etc.)
In terrestrial conditions, fertilization is internal. Sperms are l odged in the female body where 
fertilization occurs. This may lead to external development as in rep tiles and birds. They lay shelled 
eggs to protect the developing embryo from harsh terrestrial conditions. S uch animals are called 
oviparous.
In mammals, internal fertilization leads to internal development and  development of embryo is 
accomplished inside the female body, which gives birth to young one - such animals are called  
viviparous .
In some mammals like duckbill platypus and spiny ant-eater internal fertilization leads to internal 
development of young one in a shelled egg and when development is compl eted, shelled egg is laid 
which hatches to ofspring This is called ovoviviparous condition.
Viviparous and ovoviviparous animals provide more protection to their y oung one during 
development. Nourishment is provided either through stored food in the egg or through placenta 
by the mother. 
Both in animals and plants, evolution of sexual reproduction also lead to the diferentiation of 
sexes (male or female). Organisms are either having one sex (unis exual) or both the sexes 
(hermaphrodite or bisexual). Advance mode of sexual reproduction ha s unisexuality in animals 
but in plants bisexuality in general is retained. Despite the bisex uality (tape worm, earthworm etc.), 
cross fertilization is ensured for maintaining the advantage of gen etic recombination.
Fertilization is the process which leads to the union of gametes. F ertilization may occur outside the 
body (external fertilization) or inside the body of the female (interna l fertilization).1618. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
   
REPRODUCTION IN MAN                                       
Male and female have separate reproductive systems.
(a)     Male Reproductive System
                         
Male reproductive system consists of external genitalia which consis t of a pair of testes which lie 
outside the body, in the sac-like scrotum and male copulatory organ  which is used to transfer the 
sperms into the female reproductive tract. Each testis consists of a  highly complex duct system 
called seminiferous tubules, in which repeated division by the cel ls of the germinal epithelium 
produce spermatogonia. These increase in size and diferentiate into p rimary spermatocytes 
which undergo meiotic division to form secondary spermatocytes and s permatids. Eventually, the 
spermatids diferentiate into mature sperms. Fluid secreted by sertoli cells provides liquid medium, 
protection and nourishment to sperms while they are in tl e tubules.
(Fig. 18.2 a,b, Fig. 18.3). The sperms are then transferred  to the main duct of the male reproductive 
tract, the vas deferens, which forms highly convoluted epididymis.  The sperms then pass through 
the urinogenital duct and ‘are discharged out.
Animation 181:Sexual reproduction in plants
Source & Credit: Leaving BIo1718. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab1818. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 18.2 The human male reproductive system
The male reproductive system consists of two testes that p roduce sperms, ducts that carry the sperms, and various glan ds.
Fig. 18.3 Gamete formation1918. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
  
Between the seminiferous tubules are interstitial cells which secrete testes terone. This hormone 
is essential for the successful production of sperms and also c ontrols the development of male 
secondary sexual characteristics during puberty.
(b)      Female Reproductive System
          
The female reproductive system consists of  ovaries,  oviducts, uterus a nd the external genitalia 
(18.4) .
A  pair of ovaries lies within the body cavity of the female. Germ cel ls in the ovary produce many 
oogonia which divide mitotically to form primary oocytes. These are en closed in groups of follicle 
cells. The primary oocyte divides meiotically into the haploid second ary oocyte and irst polar body. 
Second meiotic division in the oocyte proceeds as far as metaphase but is not completed until the 
oocyte is fertilized by the sperm. In human only one ovum is usual ly discharged from the ovary at 
one time, this phenomenon is called ovulation.2018. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
The ovum is then transferred to the oviduct generally called fallopian  tube Or
uterine tube. The uterine tube opens into the uterus. The fertilization of th e ovum takes place in the 
proximal part of the oviduct. The fertilized ovum (zygote) enters the uteru s where it is implanted 
(conceived) and undergoes further development. A placenta is establish ed between the uterine 
and foetal tissues for the exchange of oxygen,carbondioxide, waste, n utrients and other materials. 
Uterus opens into the vagina through cervix. Urethra and vagina have in dependent openings to 
the exterior.
Female Reproductive cycle:   In females the production of egg is a cyclic activity as compared  
to males, where gamete production and release is a continuous process beginning at puberty and 
lasting throughout life.
In human females, the periodic reproductive cycle is completed in a pproximately 28 days and 
involves changes in the structure and function of the whole reproducti ve system. It is called the 
menstrual cycle and can be divided into four phases. The events of the menstrual cycle involve 
the ovaries (ovarian cycle) and the uterus (uterine cycle) and these a re regulated by pituitary 
gonadotropins.
Fig.18.4 (a)The human female reproductive system (b) Gam ete formation2118. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Primary steps in female reproductive cycles are:
1.  The pituitary gland on the onset of puberty, releases follicle s timulating hormone (FSH) which 
stimulates the development of several primary follicles. Only one of thes e follicles continues to 
grow with its primary oocytes while the rest break down by a degener ative process known as 
follicle atresia.
2.  The ovary, under the stimulus of FSH, also produces estrogen h ormone.-This, on one hand, 
stimulates the endometrium (internal living of the uterus wall) an d vascularizes it, and on the other 
hand, inhibits the secretion of FSH  from pituitary gland.
3.  Decrease of FSH and increase of estrogen, causes the pituitary g land to secrete luteinizing 
hormone (LH) which induces ovulation - the release of ovum from the fol licle.
4.  The follicle cells, after release of the egg. are modiied to form a special structure called corpus 
luteum. This yellowish glandular structure starts” secreting hor mone called progesterone. This 
hormone develops the endometrium and make it receptive for the implantation of  the zygote 
(placenta formation). 
5.   If  fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum starts degen erating. The progesterone secretion 
diminishes and its supporting efect on the spongy endometrium is r educed, which sufers a 
breakdown. This causes the discharge of blood and cell debris known as menstruation. This stage 
usually lasts for 3 - 7 days (Fig 18.5)
Oestrous cycle is a reproductive cycle found in all female mamma ls except human being. In 
this cycle, the estrogen production prepares the uterus for conception  partly and also follicle 
develops ova. At this stage, female needs a physical stimulus of ma ting for ovulation. She exhibits 
the desire for mating or is said to be on “heat”2218. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
The cycle is thus completed and the uterus is ready to enter into the nex t cycle. The human menstrual 
cycle generally repeats every 28 days although there is considerabl e variation in diferent individuals 
or even within the same individual at diferent times of her age. The en d or complete stop of the 
menstrual cycle is called menupause, after which the female stops producing the ova.
Malnourishment and emotional stresses efect the female repr oductive cycle, which 
may be disturbed. The cycle is not completed in its normal  28 days.2318. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Birth: The total gestation period (pregnancy) is usually about 280 days .
Once the placenta is established, it starts secreting the progesterone hor mone which maintains the 
pregnancy. Any disturbance in its secretion may lead to prematur e birth or miscarriage. Human 
embryo remains enclosed in amniotic sac illed with anmiotic lui d which is protective and shock 
absorpitive.Fig. 18.5 The ovarian and uterine cycles in human female 
The release of a secondary oocyte (ovulation) is timed to coincide with th e thickening of the lining of 
the uterus. The uterine cycle in humans involves the preparation of the uterine wall to receive the 
embryo if fertilization occurs. Knowing how these two cycles compar e, it is possible to determine 
when pregnancy is most likely to occur.2418. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
During this period, pituitary gland produces luteotropic hormone (L TH). Placenta also secretes 
human placental lactogen. Both these hormones stimulate mammary develop ment in preparation 
for lactation.
From beginning of the 3rd month of pregnancy, the human embryo i s referred to as the fetus. Most 
of the major organs are formed by the 12th week of pregnancy and th e remainder of the gestation 
period is taken up by growth.
It was thought that hormonal activities within the mother i.e. decrease in progesterone level onset 
the birth. But recent evidence suggest that there is a high degree of fetal  involvement in the timing of 
birth. The initial stage of birth is the result of the stimuli from  the fetal pituitary. The ACTH released 
from fetal pituitary stimulates the fetal adrenal gland to releas e corticosteroids, which cross the 
placental barrier and enter the maternal blood circulation causin g a decrease in progesterone 
production. The reduction of progesterone level, stimulates the pituitary g land to produce oxytocin 
hormone. This induces labour pains, i.e. contraction of the uterus  wall. The release of oxytocin 
occurs in “waves” during labour and provides the force to expel the fetus from the uterus.
The cervix dilates and the uterine contractions spread down over the uteru s and are strongest 
from top to bottom. Thus, pushing the baby downward leading to the d elivery of the baby. The 
umblical cord is ligated and baby is released from the mother.
Within 10-45 minutes after birth, the uterus contracts and separa te the placenta from the wall of 
the uterus and placenta then passes out through the vagina. This is  called after birth. Bleeding, 
throughout this period, is controlled by the contraction of smooth muscl e ibers which completely 
surround all uterine blood vessels supplying the placenta. Average loss of blood is about 350 cm3.
TEST TUBE BABIES
Recent biotechnical advantages has led to many improvements i n human life. One of 
the important aspect is the test tube babies.2518. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Fig. . 18.6 Placental structure
 The embryonic blood vessels that supply the developing child with n utrients and remove the 
metabolic wastes are separated from the blood vessels of the mother. Becaus e of this separation, 
the placenta can selectively ilter many types of incoming materials and microorganisms.
Parents which are unable to enjoy the normal process of fer tilization and birth of 
their ofspring due to some physiological and physical abn ormalities in any of the two 
parents are being beneited with this method.
Parental sperm and ovum is fertilized in vitro - outside the female body and then the 
zygote is implanted back into the mother uterus, placenta esta blishes and remaining 
development takes place in the body of the mother leading to nor mal birth.2618. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
SEXUALL Y TRANSMITTED DISEASES (STD)
      
 Unhealthy attitudes and low moral values sometimes lead to serious comp lication. The carrier 
may transmit this disease to their healthy partners.
(I) Gonorrhoa
          
  It is caused by a gram positive bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae , mainly afecting the mucous 
membrane of urinogenital tract. New born infants may acquire ser ious eye infections if they pass 
through the infected birth canal. It is highly contagious through  sexual contacts.
(ii) Syphilis
             
 It is caused by a spirochaete, Treponema pallidum . It damages the reproductive organs, eyes bones 
joints, central nervous system, heart and skin. Sexual contact is the major source of its dissimination.
(iii) Genital Herpes
It is caused by a herpes simplex type 2 virus, most frequently tr ansmitted by sexual contact causing 
infection of the genitalia. It produces genital soreness and ulcers in the infected areas. In infected 
pregnant woman, virus can be transmitted to infant during birth,  causing damage to eyes and CNS 
of the infant.
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deiciency Syndrome)
You are already familiar with this dangerous disease. Sexual contact is one of the major sources of 
its spread.
Control :          The above dreadful sexual diseases can be controlled and prevented by avoiding 
sexual contacts with carrier or diseased person and adopting the h ygienic conditions. The treatment 
involves medication for a long period except AIDS at present.2718. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Exercise
1.  Fill in the blanks.
1. Asexual reproduction requires only a single ________ ____organism
2. Sexual reproduction usually involves __________________ p arents.
3. Phytochromes are the special_________ sensitive pigments
4. External fertilization occurs in_________ environment.
5.  ____________ and _______animals provide more protection to their young one during 
development
6. A placenta is established between the uterine and____ ______ tissues for the exchange 
of oxygen.
7. The reduction of progesterone level, stimulates the_______ __gland to produce 
oxytocin hormone.
Q.2  Write whether the statement is true or false and write the correct statement if 
false.
1. Asexual reproduction involves mitotic cell division.
2. Asexually produced ofspring are genetically identica l to their parents.
3. Sexual reproduction involves single parent.
4. Sexually produced ofspring are identical to their parent.
Q.4.   Short questions
1. What changes occur in ovulation and menstruation during p regnancy?
2. What is the diference between oogenesis and spermatogen esis in humans?
3. How is a seed formed?
4. What is the importance of seed in the life cycle of a p lant.2818. Reproduction eLearn.Punjab
Q3.   Extensive questions.
1. What structures are associated with the human female re productive system? What 
are their functions?
2. What are the functions of placenta during pregnancy?
3. Describe human menstrual cycle.
4. Write notes on the following:
                                 (a) Parthenogenesis
                                 (b) Herpes Genitalia
                                 (c)   Asexual reproduction
                                  (d)  Seedless fruits