CHAPTER
26 Some Major
Ecosystems
Animation 26: Some major Ecosystem
Source & Credit: Wikispaces226.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
    
In the previous chapter, you have learned about the ecosystem. In this chapter, we will 
discuss the aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, climate an d weather.
CLIMATE
   
 
Life on earth, specially on land, is afected by both weath er and climate. Weather refers 
to short-term luctuations in temperature, humidity, cloud cover, wind and precipitation 
over periods of hours or days. Climate, in contrast, refers to overall patterns of weather 
that prevail from year to year even century-to-century in a pa rticular region.
AQUATIC OR HYDROSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM
     
Hydrospheric ecosystem is a “system in water where living  and non-living components 
exchange materials and transfer of energy also takes pla ce within water”. Salt-water 
ocean and sea are the largest ecosystems on the earth formin g about 71% of its surface. 
Fresh water ecosystems, in contrast, covers less than 1%. Th e unique properties of 
water lend some common features to aquatic ecosystem.
1. Temperature:  Water changes its temperature slower than air, so temperatu re in 
aquatic ecosystem is more moderate to support life.
2. Absorption of energy:  Although water may appear quite transparent, it absorbs a 
considerable amount of the light energy that sustains life. Even in clearest water, the 
intensity of light decreases rapidly with depth, so at the d epth of 600 feet or more, a 
little light is left to power photosynthesis.
3. Nutrients : The nutrients in aquatic ecosystem tend to be concentrated nea r the 
bottom sediments supporting life where light levels often are too low to support 
photosynthesis.  
4. Abundant water with appropriate temperature :  Water is an essential requirement 
for life. It is available abundantly in aquatic ecosystem to support life. The major 
factors that detennine the quantity and type of life in aquati c ecosystems are energy 
and nutrient. Appropriate temperature is present in aquatic  ecosystem to carry out 
all metabolic processes.326.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 26.1 The open ocean (a) Porpoises skim the surface , (b) rare humpback whales leap on 
the clear water (c) and ish such as this blue jack sw im, (d) the photosynthetic phytoplankton 
are the producers on which most other life ultimately de pends, (e) phytoplankton are eaten by 
zooplankton, represented by this microscopic crustacean , a copepod. The spiny projections 
on these planktonic creatures help to keep them from si nking below the photic zone.
Animation 26.1: Aquatic Ecosystem
Source & Credit:Water System426.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Productivity of Aquatic Ecosystem
The productivity can be indicated by consumption of C02 and evolution of oxygen in 
the process of photosynthesis.
 
The productivity of aquatic ecosystem is basically determine d by the light and nutrients. 
Light intensity and quality vary with the water depth, so the primary productivity also 
varies with light. The amount of nutrients also changes with season. Productivity also 
varies from zone to zone. Aquatic environment can easily be c lassiied into fresh water 
and marine (salty) water.
Fresh Water Lakes
Fresh water lakes vary tremendously in size, depth, and nutrient content, including 
distinct life zones and temperature stratiication.
Life zones are based on access to light and nutrients :  The distribution of life in lakes 
depends on access to light, to nutrients and to place for attach ment. The lake ecosystem 
can be divided into three main zones.
Littoral zone (Near-shore):  In this zone, the water is shallow, and plants ind abund ant 
light, anchorage and adequate nutrients from the bottom sedime nts. Plants in littoral 
zone communities are the most diverse; water lilies and enti rely submerged vascular 
plants and algae lourish at the deepest region of the littoral  zone.. The plants of this 
zone trap sediments carried by stream, increasing the nu trient content in.this region. 
Living among the anchored plants are microscopic organisms called plankton . These 
can be divided into two groups. Phytoplankton  (Greek “drifting plants”): these include 
photosynthetic protista, bacteria and algae.  Zooplankton  (Greek “drifting animals”): 
such as protozoa and tiny crustaceans. The greatest diversity  of animals in the lake is 
also found in this zone. Littoral invertebrate animals includ e small crustaceans, insect 
larvae, snails latworms, Hydra; vertebrates include frogs,  aquatic snakes and turtles.
As the water increases in depth farther from the shore, pl ants are unable to anchor to 
the bottom and still collect enough light for photosynthesis. This  open water area is 
divided into two regions: the upper limnetic zone and the lowe r profundal zone.526.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
As the water increases in depth farther from the shore, pl ants are unable to anchor to 
the bottom and still collect enough light for photosynthesis. This  open water area is 
divided into two regions: the upper limnetic zone and the lowe r profundal zone.
Limnetic zone : In this zone enough light penetrates to support photosynthesis. H ere, 
phytoplankton includes cyanobacteria (blue green algae) w hich serve as producers. 
These are eaten by protozoa and small crustaceans, which in turn are consumed by 
ishes.
 Profundal zone : Here, light is insuicient to support photosynthesis. The organ isms 
of this zone are mainly nourished by detritus that falls fr om the littoral and limnetic 
zone and by incoming sediment. Decomposers and detritus fee ders, such as, snails 
and certain insect larvae, bacteria, fungi and ishes, i nhabit it.Fig. 26.2 Lake, life zones There are three life zones in a typical lake : a near-shore littoral zone with rooted plants,  an open- 
water limnetic zone, and a deep, dark profundal zone.626.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Intervention of Man in Aquatic Ecosystem
Human activities may greatly accelerate the process of eutrop hication (adequate 
nurition), because nutrients are carried into lakes from f arm feedlots and sewage. 
Even if solid wastes are removed, water discharged from se wage treatment plant 
is often rich in phosphate and nitrates dissolved from wastes  and detergents. Rain 
water washes of fertilizer from ields where the manure of  thousands of cattle is 
accumulated. The water therefore, becomes highly enriche d. The added nutrients 
support excessive growth of phytoplankton. Producers like blu e-green algae form 
a scum on the lake surface, depriving the submerged pla nts of sun light; as a result 
they die. The dead plants bodies are decomposed by bacter ia, utilizing the oxygen 
present in the water, deprived of oxygen, ish, snails and  insect larvae die and 
their decaying bodies fuel more bacterial growth, further depleting oxygen. Even 
without oxygen, certain bacteria that produce foul smelling g ases thrive. Although 
it is full of life and nutrients, polluted lake smells ba d. Most of the trophic levels 
including the ish are eliminated and the bacteria and b lue- green algae dominate 
the community. Another very serious cause of polluted water is  the acid produced 
by burning of fossil fuels, which poses a diferent threa t to fresh-water ecosystem. 
Few organisms can withstand the low pH of acidiied lakes.
TERRESTRIAL OR LITHOSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM 
Light, Nutrients and Water
The ecosystem present on land or soil is called terrestrial  or lithospheric ecosystem. 
Terrestrial ecosystem receives plenty of light, and the soil  provides abundant 
nutrients. Water, however, is limited and very unevenly dis tributed both in place 
and in time. Factors which inluence life on land are gi ven below :
Temperature:  Like water, favourable temperatures are very unevenly dis tributed 
on land in place and time. On poles, the average temperatu re is below freezing. In 
temperate zones, only during certain seasons of the year it is quite favorable, but in 
tropical zones uniformly, warm, moist climate is present.
Air: In terrestrial ecosystem, air is in constant motion, so its comp osition is more 
uniform. The amount of 0 2 and C 02 in air is much consta nt and most beneicial to 
terrestrial ecosystem.
Adaptations for Terrestrial Ecosystem726.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Plants and animals shifting from water to land developed var ious types of adaptations 
for land habitat e.g.
Supporting tissues : Both plants and animals have evolved supporting tissues like vascu lar bundles 
(xylem-phloem) in plants and skeleton in animals to support them  on land against the force of 
gravity.
Conservation of water :  Plants and animals evolved various methods to conserve water in their 
body e.g. homeostasis. The mechanism of temperature regulation was d eveloped by land plants 
and animals by developing bark and skin respectively.
Division of Terrestrial Ecosystem
It can be divided into following main types such as 
1. Forest ecosystem.  It is further sub-divided into :
                                      (a) tropical ra in forests        (b) temperate deciduous forests
                                      (c) coniferous alpine and boreal forests
2. Grass land ecosystem. 3. Desert ecosystem. 4. Tundra ec osystem.826.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
 
SOME MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS IN PAKISTAN
Pakistan has a variety of seasons and climate ranging from  hot dry in plains to cold snowy 
on mountains. Some major ecosystems existing in Pakistan are;Fig. 26.3 The distribution of biomes Although mountain ranges and the sheer s >f the 
continents complicate their pattern, note the overall consistencies. Tundra and coniferous 
forest always occur in the northernmost parts of the North ern Hemisphere, while the deserts 
of Mexico, the Sahara, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Au stralia are located around 20° to 
30° North and South latitude
S. No. Major Terrestrial Ecosystems Location in Pakistan
1 Temperate Deciduous 
Forests.Shogran and Neelam valley.
2 Coniferous Alpine and 
Boreal ForestsNorthern mountains of 
Kaghan, Malam Jabba 
(Swat) Dir and Chilas
3 Grassland Ecosystem. Gilgit and Kashmir. 
Waziristan, lower Chitral 
and North Kallat.
4 Desert Ecosystem (Mianwalli, Bakhar) (Fort 
Abbas, Bahawal Nagar, 
Yazman, Bahawal Pur, Khan 
Pur and RahimYar- Khan. 
Sind.
5 Tundra Ecosystem. Mountains Kara-Koram and 
Hindukush.926.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Temperate Deciduous Forests
In Pakistan, temperate moist conditions are present in Neela m valley and Shogran. 
These forests originally covered India, Southeast Asia, eas tern North America, Europe, 
China, Australia, Japan, North and South America. Slightl y farther away from the equator, 
the rainfall is not nearly as constant, and there are pronou nced wet and dry seasons 
that means distinct summer and winter seasons. During dry season, the trees cannot 
get enough water from the soil to compensate for evaporation from th eir leaves. As 
a result, the plants have adapted to the dry season by shedd ing their leaves, thereby 
minimizing water loss. If the rains fail to return on sche dule, the trees delay forming 
new leaves until the drought passes.
Rain fall: The average rainfall is between 750 - 1500 mm.
Temperature :  Moderate temperature ranges from 4°C - 30°C.
Plants :  Some dominant plants are Taxus baccata, Pinus wallichia na, Berberis lyceum. 
Many herbs and shrubs are with height of 5m. Some grass es, ferns and other herbaceous 
plants make up ield layer. At the bottom or loor level many mos ses liverworts and 
lichens covered with litter layer are present.
Animal life :  Some very common animals are Macca multata (rhesus monkey), Solenorctos 
ubetanus  (black bear), Felis bengalensis  (leopard cat), deer, and wolves with various types 
of microorganisms to convert the litter into organic matter such as  bacteria, fungi, and 
earthworms.1026.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 26.4 Temperate deciduous forest (a) White tailed d eer is the 
largest herbivore, (b) Woodland wildlowrs (c) Blue Jay ( bird)1126.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Soil condition : The soil of temperate deciduous forest is grayish brown in colour, very 
fertile and rich in organic matter, with maximum water hol ding capacity.
Human impact :  On temperate deciduous forest large mammals such as bla ck bear, 
deer, wolves, bobcats and mountain lions were formerly abun dant, but the predators 
have been largely wiped out by humans. Need of lumber a nd its use in agriculture has 
reduced many deciduous forests from the world.
Coniferous Alpine and Boreal Forests
In Pakistan these forests are in upper Kaghan, Dir and C hilas, Malam Jaba in Swat 
valley. In the world, they stretch across Eurasia (Europe +  Asia) and North America, 
Canada just south of the tundra. Northern coniferous forests ar e also called Taiga. 
Conditions in taiga are harsher than those in the temperate d eciduous forest. The 
winters are longer and colder, and the growing season is shorter. The few months 
of warm weather are too short to allow trees the luxurious growth of regrowing. As 
a result, evergreen coniferous trees populate this type of for est, almost entirely with 
small waxy needles. The waxy coating and small surfac e area of the needles reduce 
water loss by evaporation during cold months, and leaves rema in on the trees year 
around. Coniferous forests located at high altitude are calle d alpine while coniferous 
forests located at high latitude are called boreal. Can you diferentiate between altitude 
and latitude?1226.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 26.5 The Taiga The small needles and pyramidal sh ape of conifers allows them to shed 
heavy snows. Winter is a challenge not only for the tree s but also for animals such as this 
snowshoe hare and the bobcat that preys on it (a). Th e hare is also prey for the great home 
owl (b). Taiga animals face diminished food supply but  increased energy requirements 
during subfreezing weather.
Snow cover and temperature : There is a constant cover of snow characterized by long 
severe winter. Temperatures may be below freezing point, up to 10 °C.
Animal and plant life :  Because of its harsh climate, the diversity of life is mu ch low. 
Large mammals, bison, wolf, black bear, deer, Marco pol o sheep and smaller animals 
such as small Kashmir lying squirrel, snowshoe hare, wolverine, crossbills, are present.’
Plants like Pinus wallichiana, Pirius roxburgii, Abies pindrow, Picea  smithianci Cederous 
deodara  are present.
Human impact :  Due to severity of climate and remoteness most of the coniferous forests 
remains undisturbed, but these forests are major source of lumber for construction, 
so forests have been cleared in the world.1326.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
 The Grass Land Ecosystem
Grassland ecosystems are found in Gilgit, Kashmir, Waziri stan, lower Chitral and North 
Kallat. In the world, you can see a large grassland in the center of Eurasian continents. 
Grassland present in temperate climates are also called P rairies, such as Prairies of 
North America, Pampas of Argentina. These grasslands do not have woody plants so 
they are known as Prairies. But the grassland in tropical  climates have woody trees and 
are called Savanna.
Fig. 26.6 Grass land ecosystem (a) Pronghorn antelope (b ) 
Prairie dogs (c) Bison herds (d) Conelower1426.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Rain fall:  The grasslands usually face severe droughts(26.7).Ann ual rainfall is about 
250 to 750 ml. In tropical and subtropical grasslands, ra infall eaches about 1500 mm 
(60 inches). Thus grassland occurs in regions where m ean annual rainfall is midway 
between a forest and a desert. In general, they have a con tinuous cover of grass and 
virtually no trees at all except along the rivers. Water and Fire are the crucial factors in 
die competition between grasses and trees.
Plant life: The dominant spebies are graminoids i.e. grasses, and grass-like plants. 
Certain forbs such as composites, legumes and many other h erbaceous plant species 
are also associated with grasses.
Layering : Layering is the characteristic of grassland. Tall grass es (Andropogon, Panicum) 
form the irst) layer, mid high grasses (Stipa, Sporobolus,  Oryzopsis) form the second 
layer and third layer is formed by short grasses and for bs and warfare species (Poa, 
Bromus) with mosses and lichens.
Soil conditions :  The soil moisture is limited on account of low precipitation a nd high 
evaporation. Upper soil layer in which grasses are rooted is  normally moist but deeper 
layers are constantly dry. The soil of grassland is basi cally impermeable with excessive 
salinity.
Animal life :  Dominant species are herbivores; invertebrates including i nsects are very 
numerous, grasshoppers become so numerous that they can comp ete with other 
herbivores for plant foliage. The predators are reptiles, a mphibians and mammals. For 
example, lizards, toads and turtles prey on insects; foxes  and wolves among mammals 
are very common. Among decomposers many bacteria, actinomyce tes and fungi like 
molds, yeasts, mushrooms, bracket fungi are most common. Lar ge animals like zebras, 
wild horses, bisons are important.Fig 26.71526.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Productivity ; In temperate grassland the rate of primary production is ab out 700 - 
1500 g/m2 annually. In sub-humid tropical grassland it is more th an 4000 g/m2 . In 
annual grasslands, large grazing animals consume rel atively small amount (5 - 10%) of 
the total herbage produced. Invertebrates, rodents and birds may consume an equal 
amount or a little more. 
Human impact: The natural grasslands in the world are used for crop pr oduction and 
live stock management. Only a small fraction of the world’s grasslands has been in 
cultivation due to acid climatic condition with soil erosion and salinity. Grazing has 
prominent efects on grassland; over-grazing causes reducti on in herbage cover 
and result is soil erosion. Many lands are converted into de serts by a process called 
desertiication due to over grazing
Desert Ecosystem
In Pakistan you can ind the desert ecosystem in western Pu njab (Mianwali and Bukhar) 
where it is known as “Thai”.
In southern Punjab, areas like Fort Abbass, Bahawal Nag ar, Yazman, Bahawal Pur 
(Cholistan), Khan pur and Rahim yar khan also have dese rts.
In Sindh, this desert ecosystem is called “Thar”.
These biomes are found on every continent often around 20 to 30  north and south 
latitude and also in the rain shadows of major mountain rang es. Desert includes a 
variety of environments. At one extreme are certain areas of th e Sahara or Chile, where 
it virtually never tains and there is no vegetation at all (Fig . 26.8a).
       
Fig 26.81626.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
The more common deserts, however, are characterized by wid ely spaced vegetation 
and large areas of bare ground.
Rain fall: Less than 25 to 50 cm (10 - 20 inches) or not at all.
Plant life:  The plants are often spaced evenly as if planted by han d (Fig 26.8b) Frequently, 
the perennial plants are bushes or cacti with large shal low root systems.
Plants are covered with the waterproof waxy coating to prevent eva poration of 
precious water. Water is stored in thick stems of cacti and other succulents. Desert 
plants conserve water in a variety of ways. Cacti and Euphor bia have leshy stems in 
which water is stored for use during the period of drought.
Animal life:  Like plants, animals are also specially adapted to survi ve on little water. 
Most deserts appear to be almost completely devoid of animal li fe during day, because 
the animals seek relief from the sun and heat in cool und er ground burrows. In the 
dark, when desert cools down, homed lizards, snakes and other reptiles emerge to 
feed, as do mammals siich as kangaroo, rat, and birds s uch as burrowing owl.
Most of the smaller animals survive without ever drinking at a ll, getting all the water 
they need from their food and what produced during cellula r respiration in their tissues. 
Large animals such as desert bighorn sheep and camel are dependent on permanent 
water holes during the driest times of the year.
Human im pact: While human activities are reducing the extent of many biom es, they 
are causing the spread of deserts, a process called des ertiication.
A dramatic example is occurring in the Sahel, which bor ders the southern edge of the 
Sahara desert in Africa. Twenty-ive years of below averag e rainfall, coupled with rapid 
growth of the human population have caused a steady southward spread of desert. 
The Sahel is an example of a human population exceeding  the carrying capacity of the 
land. The loss of the productivity of the ecosystem is nearly irreversible and massive 
famines, such has occurred in Ethiopia in the mid 1980s  are a tragic result.1726.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Tundra Ecosystem
   
The last biome seen before reaching the polar ice-caps i s the arctic tundra, a vast treeless 
region bordering the Arctic ocean. It is used to describe ty pes of vegetation in
treeless high latitudes between taiga and polar ice caps,  and at high altitude across the 
mountain above timberline such as mountain of Karakoram and Koh Hindu Kush in Pakistan.
Aractic tundra stretches across Northern North America, Northe rn Europe and Siberia 
(with high latitude).Fig. 26.9 Tundra : Vegetation and animals, (a) Caribou (b) 
Arctic foxe (c) Dwarf clover (wild lower)1826.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
Plant and animal life :  The ground is carpeted with small perennial lowers and  dwarf 
willows no more than a few centimeters tall often with large lichen called reindeer 
moss. The standing pools provide superb mosquito habitat. The mosquitoes and other 
insects provide food for numerous birds (ducks and geese) most of which migrate a 
long distance to nest and raise their young during the brie f summer feast. The tundra 
vegetation supports lemmings, which are eaten by wolves, snow y owls, arctic foxes 
and even grizzly bears.
Human impact:  The tundra is perhaps the most fragile of all the biomes because of 
its short growing season. A willow 10 centimeter (4 inches)  high may have a trunk 7 
centimeter (3 inches) in diameter and be 50 years old. Human activities in the tundra 
leave scars that persist for centuries. Fortunately, for the tu ndra inhabitants, the impact 
of civilization is localized around oil drilling sites, pip elines, mines and military bases.
Humans and Ecosystems
The expanding human population has left relatively few ec osystems undisturbed. Our 
impact on natural ecosystem are so diverse and wide rangin g that they far exceed the 
scope of this book. Ecosystems dominated by people tend to be si mple, that is, they 
have fewer species and fewer community interactions than a n undisturbed ecosystem
Fig. 26.10 Temperature and rainfall inluence on biome di stribution1926.Some Major Ecosystem eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
Q1    Fill in the blanks.
1. Water is slower to heat and ________________than air.
2. The distribution of life in lakes depends on access to________, and to place for attachment.
3. Ecosystem on land is also known as_____________ ecosystem.
4. Ecosystem in water is also called as____________ ecosystem.
Q.2     Short questions.
1. Defnle productivity of an ecosystem.
2. List four adaptations in plants and animals for terrestri al ecosystem.
3. Name three zones in lake ecosystem.
4. How many biomes are present in the world, name only ive of them.
5. Give the names of some major ecosystems on land in Pakista n.
1. What are the four major requirements for life? Which two ar e limiting in terrestrial 
ecosystem?
2. List some adaptations of
3.             (a) desert plants           (b) desert animals to heat and drought.
4. Where is life in oceans (hydrospheric ecosystem) most abu ndant and why?
5. Distinguish between three diferent zones in the lake - ecos ystem.Q.4 Extensive Questions