CHAPTER
16 Support And
Movements
Animation 16 : Support and movement
Source & Credit: Wikispaces216. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
CONCEPT AND NEED
Animals and plants show a variety of physical and biochemic al activities. The main diference 
between plants and animals is in their locomotion; animals show movement while plants do not.
Both plants and animals need support against gravity. The coll enchymatous cells in plants give 
support to the baby plants and sclerenchymatous cells to the adul t plants. In animals muscles, 
cartilage and bones provide support. They enable them to move towards  food, away from danger 
and for shelter.
SUPPORT IN PLANTS
You are familiar with the parts of plant like stem, root, leaves etc.  One of the most important 
functions of the stem is to give support and acts as a supply li ne between root and aerial parts of 
the plant. In the stem, the function of support is shared among s everal types of cells (Fig 16.1). 
a) Parenchyma cells:  
The tissues which provide support to the plant are parencyhma. p arenchyma  cells of epidermis, 
cortex and pith take in water by osmosis. Thus an internal hydr ostatic pressure called turgor 
pressure, keeps them rigid and resistant to bending. If they loos e turgidity, herbaceous stem wilts. 
The turgor pressure is extremely important to maintain the turgidity  in plants.
The  collenchyma  cell  in cortex and highly ligniied schler encyma cells in xylem tissues,give support 
to the plants. In most terrestrial plants, the major mechanical s tress is imposed by wind, so that 
stem must be able to resist bending. The vascular bundles contain ing the xylem are tough and 
inextensible to perform the same function as steel rods in reinforced concrete. This arrangement 
as a ring within the stem provides very efective resistance to wind stres s, and weight bearing 
ability.
In the stem of some plants, for example, sunlower, the vascular bun dles are strengthened by 
additional sclerenchyma ibers, which form bundle cap.
The loss of water due to ex-osmosis from plant cells causes plant or  its parts to wilt. How plant cell 
maintains turgor pressure is an important phenomenon.316. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.1 Specialized plants cells416. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Turgor pressure is generated by high osmotic pressure of the cell vacuole. The membrane that 
bounds vacuole, is called tonoplast which contains a number of active transport systems that pump 
ions into the vacuole or vacuolar compartments despite the higher concentra tion than that of the 
extracellular luid. Because of the higher ionic concentration, water  enters the vacuole and hence 
provides turgidity, mechanical support, to soft tissues of plant. The tissues which provide support 
to the plants are:
(b) Sclerenchyma Cells
They have thick secondary cell walls usually impregnated with  lignin, an organic substance that 
makes the walls tough and hard. Most of the sclerenchyma cells a re non-living. Their primary 
function is to provide support to the plant parts.
There are three types of sclerenchymatous cells.
(i) Fibers (Tracheids):  These are long and cylindrical and they may exist as solid bundles in xylem 
or as bundle caps.
(ii) Sclereides:  These are shorter than ibers and are found in seed coats and nut s hells and 
provide protection.
(iii) Vessels (Tracheae):  Long tubular structures, join end to end to form long water conductin g 
pipe in xylem.
(c) Collenchyma Cells
Collenchyma cells have protoplasts and usually lack secondary walls. They have angular thickening 
in their primary walls. They are usually grouped in strand s or cylinders. Collenchyma cells provide 
support to young herbaceous parts of the plant. Young stems, for in stance, often have a cylinder 
of collenchyma just below their surface. Collenchyma cells are elastic, elongate with the growth of 
stems and leaves.
Signiicance of Secondary Growth
Stem and root often begin to thicken after their apical meristem has pr oduced embryonic or primary 
tissue. An increase in plant girth due to vascular cambium an d cork cambium is called secondary 
growth. The result of secondary growth is most evident in woody perenni al plants like trees, shrubs 
and vine. Secondary growth occurs due to cell division in : (i ) Vascular cambium (ii) Cork cambium.516. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Vascular cambium  irst appears as a cylinder of actively dividing cells between p rimary xylem and 
primary phloem. Vascular cambium gives rise to two new tissues , one is the secondary xylem  next 
to the inner surface of the vascular cambium, the other is the secondary phloem  appearing outer 
to the vascular cambium.
The secondary xylem causes most of the increase in stem thickness.  Over the years a woody stem 
gets thicker and thicker as its vascular cambium produces la yer upon layer of secondary xylem. 
These layers are visible as rings. Since one growth ring is  formed in one year, a count of the rings 
at the base of trunk indicates the age of a tree at the time it was cut.
In most trees, the conduction of water and dissolved substances by s econdary xylem become 
limited to the outer or younger portion of that tissue. As trees grow older  only few annual growth 
rings are active in conduction at one time. The active portion is call ed sap wood . The inactive non-
conducting wood is called heartwood.
In most species, the heartwood accumulates a variety of chemical s such as resins, oils, gums and 
tannins. These provide a resistance to decay and insect attack, f or example, in red cedar and 
conifers.616. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.2 Dicot woody stem716. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Another important function of the cambium is to form callus  or wood tissue on or over the wound, 
soft parenchymatous tissues are rapidly formed on or below the dama ged surface of stems and 
roots. Callus also unites the branches during budding and g rafting.
MOVEMENTS IN PLANTS
Organisms respond to the external as well as internal stimuli. A nimals move in response to 
external stimuli; similarly plants also show movements. Animals  change their location in response 
to stimulus. Plants are ixed therefore, they change their growth pattern .
Types of Movements
There are two types of movements:
1. Autonomic movements                           2. Paratoni c movements.
Autonomic movements are spontaneous movements due to internal causes whereas  paratonic 
movements are due to external causes.The wood from diferent species of trees difers greatly in their suitab ility for speciic uses. 
Density, hardness, lexibility, shock resistance, compression stren gth and texture determine 
quality and commercial use. The commercial cork is also made  from the bark of trees such as 
Quercus suber.816. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
1. Autonomic movements :  Autonomic movements are of three types:
(i) Tactic movements (ii) Turgor movements (iii) Growth movements.
(i) Tactic Movements :  These are the movements of an entire cell or organism i.e. locomotion 
due to internal stimulus. The tactic movement may be positive if it is towards the stimulus or 
negative if it is away from the stimulus. Tactic movements are the m ovements of locomotion; they 
are further classiied on the basis of the nature of the stimulus, ( a) Phototactic movement:  It is 
a movement in response to stimulus of light. The movement may be toward s the source of light 
(positive) or away from the source of light (negative). The best examp le of positive tactic movement 
is the passive movement of chloroplast due to cyclosis. This movement help s the chloroplast to 
absorb maximum light for C02 ixation. The light intensity and direction both afect the intra cell ular 
distribution of chloroplasts. (b) Chemotactic movement :  The movement in response to stimulus 
of chemicals is called chemotactic movement. The movements shown by sp erms of liver-worts, 
mosses, ferns towards archegonia in response to stimulus of nucl eic acid released by the ovum is 
one such example.
(ii) Turgor Movements :  Turgor movement is due to diferential changes in turgor and size 
of cells as a result of gain or loss of water. Rapid movements of l ealets in “touch-me-not” plant 
and sleep movements of the plants fall under this category of movements,  (a) Sleep movements : 
Bean plants and some members of legume family lower their leaves in  the evening and raise them 
in the morning. These are known as sleep movements. These sleeping  movements are due to 
daily changes in turgor pressure in the pulvinus. The plac e of attachment of leaf with the shoot, 
pulvinus, is swollen portion of the petiole composed of parenchymatous  cells with relatively large 
inter cellular spaces and central strand of vascular tissues.
When turgor pressure on the lower side of pulvinus increases the leaves  rise and become horizontal. 
When turgor pressure decreases on the lower side of pulvinus, the leaves  lower and go to “sleeping” 
position, (b) Rapid movement of lealets :  When the compound leaf of sensitive plant Mimosa 
is touched, the lealets fold together. This response takes a second or two resulting from rapid 
loss of turgor by the cells in pulvinus at the base of each lealet. The investigation has shown that 
potassium (K+) ions move irst, which causes water to leave the cell by exosmosis. I t takes about ten 
minutes to regain the turgor and restore the internal turgidity of leaf916. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
.
(iii) Growth Movements :  Growth movements are due to unequal growth on two sides of plant 
organs like stem, root, tendrils, buds etc. There are three types of gr owth movements, (a) Epinasty  
: It is shown by leaves, petals etc. The upper surface of leaf in bud condition shows more growth 
as compared with the lower surface. This leads to opening of bud s, (b) Hyponasty:  If growth in 
the lower surface of the leaf in bud condition is more than that of the upper surface then the bud 
will remain closed, (c) Nutation :  The growing tip of young stem moves in a zig-zag fashion due to 
alternate changes in growth on opposite sides of the apex. This mod e of growth is called nutation.
2. Paratonic Movements :  These movements are due to external causes. These are of following 
types.
(a) Tropic Movements :  The word tropic is derived from Greek word ‘Tropos’ meaning ‘turn’ . It 
is the movement in curvature of whole organ towards or away from stimu li such as light, gravity, 
and touch. Following are common tropic movements: (i) Phototropism :  It is the movement of 
part of plant, in response to stimulus of light and is caused b y the diferential growth of part of a 
plant like stem or root, (ii) Thigmotropism : It is the movement in response to stimulus of touch, 
for example climbing vines. When they come in contact with some sol id object, the growth on the 
opposite side of contact increases and the tendril coils around the s upport, (iii) Chemotropism  : 
The movement in response to some chemicals is called chemotropism. T he hyphae of fungi are 
chemotropic. (iv) Hydrotropism : The movement of plant parts in response to stimulus of water is 
called hydrotropism. The growth of roots toward water is due to positive hydrotropism and growth 
of shoot away from water is negatively hydrotropic. (v) Geotropism :  It is the response to gravity. 
Roots display positive geotropism and shoots negative geotropism.
(b) Nastic Movements :  These are the non-directional movements of parts of plant in response 
to external stimuli. These are of two types: (i) Nyctinasty :  The nyctinastic movements are shown by 
the organs in response to external stimuli leading to diferential grow th. These are due to turgor and 
growth changes. It may be of two types: (a) Photonasty :  The principal stimulus is the photoperiod. 
The lowers open and close due to light intensity. (b) Thermonasty  : It is due to temperature. The 
lowers of tulip close at night because of rapid growth in the lower side by upward and inward 
bending of the petals.1016. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
(ii) Haptonastic movements occur in response to contact. Examples include the action of the Venus 
ly trap. 
Role of Plant Growth Substances In Plant Movement
Plants do not move from one place to other like animals. However, their or gans show movements, 
which are controlled by hormones. Auxins play major role in p hototropism. It is believed that 
unequal distribution of auxin indole acetic acid (I A A) in the coleoptiles stumps, produces unequal 
cell enlargement, causing a bend in the organ towards source of light.
Auxins are also responsible for positive gravitropism of roots and n egative geotropism of stems. 
Auxins inhibit the growth of root cells. The cells of the upper su rface, therefore elongate and the 
root curves downward. Auxins on the other hand, stimulate the growth of  the stem cells. The cells 
of the lower surface, elongate and stem curves upward. Nastic movements  are due to some balance 
or ratio between growth inhibitors (abscisins) and growth stimula tors (gibberellins). However, it 
has been observed that epinasty is due to auxins and hyponasty due to gibberellins.
SUPPORT AND MOVEMENTS IN ANIMALS
The skeleton is tough and rigid framework of the body of animals which provides protection, shape 
and support to the body organs. It is composed of inorganic or org anic substances or both. In 
protozoa it is secreted by a single cell, whereas in multicellular  animals it is composed of specialized 
cells. There are three main types of skeleton in animals, hydrostati c skeleton, exoskeleton and 
endoskeleton.1116. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
1. Hydrostatic Skeleton
In animals that lack a hard skeleton, a luid illed gastrovasc ular cavity or coelom can act as hydrostatic 
skeleton. Hydrostatic skeleton provides support and resistance to the con traction of muscles so 
that motility results. It is found in cnidarians, annelids a nd other soft-bodied invertebrates.
The sea anemone has hydrostatic skeleton. Its cavity is illed with s ea water to extend its body and 
tentacles. The sea anemone closes its mouth and constricts its muscle ibers that are arranged in 
circles around its body. The contraction of these circular muscl es puts pressure on the liquid in 
body cavity and that pressure forces the body to maintain upright stature.
In earthworm, the hydrostatic skeleton consists of luid-illed compar tments separated by septa. 
Contraction of circular muscle causes compartments to elongate and contraction of longitudinal 
muscle causes a compartment to shorten. Alternating waves of elongation and contraction move 
the earthworm through the soil, aided by paired setae in each segmen t.
2. Exoskeleton
An exoskeleton is hardened outer covering to which internal muscles a re attached. The exoskeleton 
is inert and non-living. It is secreted by the ectoderm in animal  cells. It is composed of two layers. 
The epicuticle is the outer most layer. Because it is made up of wa xy lipoprotein, it is impermeable 
to water and serves as a barrier to microorganisms in insects. T he bulk of exoskeleton is below the 
epicuticle and is called the procuticle.Procuticle consists of an outerlayer exocuticle and inner layer 
of endocuticle. The procuticle is composed of chitin, tough, leathery,  polysaccharide and several 
kinds of protein. It is further hardened by sclerotization and som etimes by impregnation with 
calcium carbonate.
The simplest example of an exoskeleton is the shell of mollusca, wh ich generally consists of just 
one or two pieces. Some marine bivalvia and snail have shell compos ed of crystals of calcium 
carbonate. The shell of land snail generally lacks the hard  minerals and are much lighter. Molluscan 
shell can grow as the animal grows and growth rings are app arent on the shell. The soft parts of the 
molluscan body have a hydrostatic skeleton as well.
The most complex exoskeleton is found among the arthropods. The arth ropods have made a 
variety of adaptations to allow them to live and grow within their exosk eleton. The invagination of 
exoskeleton forms irm ridges and bars for muscle attachment. Another  modiication of exoskeleton 
is the formation of joints. The exoskeleton are thin, soft and lexible a t joints, consequently joint 
move very easily. Other modiications of exoskeleton include sensory receptor s called sensilla that 
are in the form of bristles, and lenses and the modiication of the ex oskeleton that permits gaseous 
exchange.1216. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
The exoskeleton in arthropoda protects the animals against their enemi es and rough environment. 
It also protects them from drying.
However, it has one disadvantage and that is animals cannot grow l arger. The animal, therefore, 
needs to shed its exoskeleton periodically and replace it with one of the larger size. This process is 
known as “ecdysis or moulting.”
Ecdysis is divided into four stages:
1. Enzymes, secreted from hypodermal glands, begin digesting the old  endocuticle. This digestion 
separates hypodermis and the exoskeleton.
2. The old exoskeleton is split and pores are formed.
3. The digestion of endocuticle is followed by secretion of new procuti cle and epicuticle.
4. Finally, the new exoskeleton is hardened by deposition of calcium c arbonate. During the 
hardening process, the arthropod is vulnerable to predators and rema ins hidden. All these 
changes are controlled by the nervous system and the hormone ecdysone.
Some major functions of the skeletal system are as foll ows:
(i) Support and shape : Bones support soft tissues and serve as attachment sites for most musc les 
and provide shape to the body.
(ii) Protection: Bones protect critical internal organs, such as brain, spina l cord, heart and lungs.
(iii) Movement:  Skeletal muscles attached to the bones help in moving the body. 
(iv) Mineral homeostasis: Bones serve as store for calcium, phosphorus, sodium and potassiu m. 
Through negative feedback mechanisms, bones can release or take up  minerals to maintain 
homeostasis.
(v) Blood cell production: Red and white blood cells are produced in bone marrow, a connective 
tissue found within certain bones.1316. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
3. Endoskeleton
The endoskeleton is primarily made up of two types of tissues, bones and cartilage. Both bones 
and cartilage are types of rigid connective tissue. Both consists of living cells embedded in the 
matrix of protein called collagen.
Bone :  It is the most rigid form of connective tissue. The collagen ibers of bone are hardened by 
deposit of calcium phosphate. Bones supporting your arms and l egs consist of an outer shell of 
compact bone, with spongy bone in the interior. Compact bone is dens e and strong and provides 
an attachment site for a muscle. Spongy bone is light, rich in  blood vessels, and highly porous. The 
cavities of spongy bone contain bone marrow where blood cells are for med. There are three types 
of cells associated with bone: 
Bone-forming cell (osteoblast ), mature bone cell (osteocyte ), and bone dissolving cells (osteoclast 
).
Fig. 16.3 Cells of bone1416. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Early in development, when bone is replacing cartilage, the osteocla sts invade and dissolve the 
cartilage. Then osteoblasts replace it with bone. As bones grow, th e matrix of bone is hardened 
and the osteoblasts are gradually entrapped within it.
Cartilage : It is much softer than bone. It is a form of connective tissue. It covers ends of the bone 
at the joint, and also supports the lexible portion of nose and external  ears. The living cells of 
cartilage are called chondrocytes. These cells secrete lexible, elasti c, non-living matrix collagen 
that surrounds the chondrocytes. No blood vessels penetrate into this carti lage. There are three 
main types of cartilage.
(i) Hyaline Cartilage : It is the most abundant type in human body. It is found at the mova ble 
joints.
(ii) Elastic Cartilage:  It has matrix containing bundles of collagens ibers. It forms external 
pinnae of ears and the epiglottis.
(iii) FibroCartilage:
HUMAN SKELETON
Human skeleton can be divided into two parts, axial skeleton and a ppendicular skeleton.
1) Axial Skeleton
The axial skeleton includes the skull, the vertebrae, ribs and the sternum.
Skull:  It is made up of cranium and facial bones. The cranium c onsists of 8 bones (Fig 16.4), 4 
unpaired and 2 paired which protect the brain. Parietal and temporal are paired bones, whereas 
frontal, occipital, sphenoid and ethmoid are unpaired bones. Be sides that there are 14 facial bones 
of which 6 are paired and 2 unpaired. The paired facial b ones are maxilla, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal, 
palatine and inferior concha. The unpaired facial bones are m andible and vomer.1516. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.4 Human skull1616. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Vertebral Column :  Vertebral column extends from the skull to the pelvis to form backbone,  
which protects the spinal cord (Fig 16.5). Normally the vertebra l column has 4 curvatures, which 
provide more strength than does the straight column. The vertebral col umn consists of 33 vertebrae. 
The vertebrae are named according to their location in the body, viz, c ervical, thoracic, lumbar and 
pelvic.
The cervical  vertebrae include seven vertebrae which lie in the neck region. The irs t two cervical 
vertebrae are atlas vertebra and axis vertebra. There are twelve thoracic  vertebrae located in the 
thoracic region, ive in  lumbar  region and nine in pelvic  region which form two sets, sacrum and 
coccyx. Sacrum is formed by the fusion of anterior ive vertebrae, wh ereas coccyx is formed by the 
fusion of four posterior vertebrae.
Rib cage :  It is composed of twelve pairs of ribs that articulate with the thorac ic vertebrae. Ten 
of them connect anteriorly with sternum, either directly or through th e costal arch. The lower two 
pairs of ribs are called “loating ribs” because they do not attac h to the sternum. The rib cage 
provides support to a semi-vaccum chamber called the “chest cavity”.
2) Appendicular Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton consists of pectoral girdle and appenda ges (fore limbs), and pelvic girdle 
and appendages (hind limbs). (Fig 16.5)1716. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.5 Human skeleton1816. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Pectoral Girdle and Fore Limb :  Pectoral girdle comprises scapula, suprascapula, and cla vicle. 
The clavicle connects scapula with sternum.
The fore limb consists of humerus, radius and ulna, 8 carp als, 5 metacarpals and 14 phalanges.
Humerus forms ball and socket joint with scapula, while at di stal end humerus forms hinge joint 
with radius and ulna. The radius and the ulna at their di stal end form multistage joint with eight 
wrist bones called carpals. Five metacarpals form the framework  of palm of the hand. Five rows of 
the phalanges are attached to the metacarpals. They support the ingers .
Pelvic Girdle and Hind Limb :  Pelvic girdle attaches the hind limb to the vertebral column (Fig 
16.5). It consists of two coxal bones. Each is formed by the fus ion of three bones ilium, ischium and 
pubis. The pelvic girdle supports the pelvic region.
The hind-limb consists of 1 femur, 2 tibia and ibula, 7 ta rsals 5 meta-tarsals and 14 phalanges. 
Femur is the proximal bone which forms a hip joint with the hip bone, it is a ball and socket joint. 
At the distal end, the femur forms knee joint with the proximal end of two parallel bones called 
tibia and ibula. The distal end of the tibia and ibula forms  a joint with seven tarsals, which are also 
distally attached to ive metatarsal bones of ankle. Five rows of the four teen phalanges of the toes 
are attached to metatarsals (Fig 16.5).
Joints
Joints occur where bones meet. They not only hold our skeleton together, bu t also give it the mobility.
Joints are classiied on the basis of the amount of movement allowed by them, into three categories:
(i) Immovable joints      (ii) Slightly movable joints      (iii) Freely movable joints
The freely movable joints are of two types viz. hinge joint and ball and socket joint (Fig. 16.6)1916. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Joints are also classiied on the basis of structure:
1. Fibrous Joints: These joints are held together by short collagen ibers embedded in conn ective 
tissue. Such joints are present in the skull, and they ix teeth into the jaw.
2. Cartilaginous Joints:  These joints allow little or no movement. Hyaline cartilage forms join t 
between growing bone. The bones held together by ibrous cartilage are f ound between vertebrae 
at the point where coxal bones meet in front of the pelvis.
3. Synovial Joints:  These joints contain a cavity illed with luid and are adapted to r educe friction 
between the moving joints. The joint is surrounded by a layer of conn ective tissue called “ibrous 
capsule” and their inner layer the synovial membrane. Some parts of capsule may be modiied to 
form distinct ligament, holding the bones together.
Based on structure and movements allowed, the synovial joints can be c lassiied further into major 
categories.
(i) Hinge Joint : The joint that allows the movements in two directions. These are at elbow  and 
knee. At these joints, pair of muscles are arranged in the same p lane as that of joints. One end of 
each muscle, the origin is ixed to the immovable bone on one side of joi nt and the other end of 
muscles, the insertion is attached to the far side of the joint. Fig 16.6 Three kinds of joints2016. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
(ii) Ball and Socket Joint: The joint that allows the movement in several directions. Such joints 
have at least two pairs of muscles present perpendicular to each other.  They provide maximum 
lexibility. Hip joint and shoulder joint are the examples of ball  and socket joints.
DEFORMITIES OF SKELETON
Human skeleton supports an upright body. Sometimes our skeletal s ystem becomes weak and 
results in deformations. The causes of the deformations are variable e.g.
1. Genetic Causes
Cleft palate, a condition in which palatine processes of maxill a and palatine bone fail to fuse. The 
persistent opening between the oral and nasal cavity interferes with sucking. It can lead to inhalation 
of food into the lungs causing aspiration pneumonia. Microcephaly , the small sized skull is caused 
by some genetic defect. Arthritis  covers over 100 diferent types of inlammatory or degenerative 
diseases that damage the joints. Osteoarthritis  is the most common chronic arthritis, which is a 
degenerative joint disease also caused by genetic defect.
2. Hormonal Causes
Osteoporosis is a group of diseases in which bone resorption out pa ces bone deposit. In this case 
bone mass is reduced and chemical composition of the matrix re mains normal. Osteoporosis 
mostly occurs in aged women, which is related to decreased estrogen  level. Other factors which may 
contribute include, insuicient exercise, diet poor in calcium and  protein, smoking, etc. Estrogen 
replacement therapy (ERT) ofers the best protection against osteoporotic bone fractures.2116. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
3. Nutritional Causes
Osteomalacia (soft bones) includes a number of disorders i n which the bones receive 
inadequate minerals. In this disease, calcium salts ar e not deposited and hence ones 
soften and weaken. Weight bearing bones of legs and pelvi s bend and deform. The 
main symptom is the pain when weight is put on afected bone s.
Rickets  is another disease in children with bowed legs and defor med pelvis. It is 
caused by deiciency of calcium in diet or vitamin ‘D’ dei ciency. It is treated by vitamin 
‘D’ fortiied milk and exposing skin to sunlight. 
Disc - Slip
Each intervertebral disc is a cushion - like pad composed  of an inner semi luid  nucleus 
pulposus  which acts as rubber ball to give a disc its elasticity a nd compressibility and 
a strong outer ring of ibrocartilage, the annulus ibrosus.  The annulus ibrosus holds 
together successive vertebrae.
The discs act as shock absorber during walking, jumping,  running and to lesser extent  bend laterally. 
Severe or sudden physical trauma to spines for example from bendi ng forward while lifting a heavy 
object may result in herniation  of one or more discs. The herniated disc (commonly known slippe d 
disc) usually involves rupture of annulus ibrosus followed by protrusion of the spongy nucleus 
pulposus. If protrusion presses on spinal cord or on spinal n erves exiting from spinalcord, generate 
severe pain or even destruction of these netvous structure. Disc slip is treated with bed rest, traction 
and painkiller. If this fails disc may be removed surgica lly.
Spondylosis
It is the disease, which causes immobility and fusion of vertebr al joint.2216. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Sciatica
It is characterized by stabbing pain radiating over the course of  sciatic nerve. It results due to injury 
of proximal sciatic nerve, which might follow a fall, a herni ated disc or improper administration of 
an injection into the buttock. This may result in a number of low er limb impairment depending on 
the precise nerve root injured. When sciatic nerve is completely tran sected, the legs become nearly 
useless. They cannot be lexed and all foot-ankle movement is lost. Recover y from sciatic injury is 
usually slow and incomplete.
Arthritis
Arthritis is inlammatory or degenerative disease that damages joints.  It results in pain, stifness, 
swelling of the joint. Acute forms of arthritis usually result f rom bacterial invasion and are treated 
with antibiotics. The membrane, lining the joint thickens, luid production is decreased, which 
consequently leads to increased friction. Chronic arthritis inc ludes osteoarthritis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and gouty arthritis.
REPAIR OF BROKEN BONES
Despite remarkable strength, the bones may break. During youth, most fractures result from 
trauma that may twist or break the bones such as sports injuries , automobile accidents, falls etc. In 
old age, bones become thin and weak and hence fractures occur m ore frequently.2316. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
A fracture is treated by reduction which follows realignment of  the broken bone ends. There are 
two types of reduction: closed and open reduction. In closed reducti on the bone ends are coaxed 
back to their normal position by physician’s hand. In open r eduction surgery is performed and the 
bone ends are secured together with pins or wires. After broken bone is  reduced, it is immobilized 
by a cast (or by traction) to allow the healing process to begin. H ealing time is 8-12 weeks, but it is 
much longer for large weight — bearing bones and for bones of eld erly people (because of their 
poorer blood circulation).
The repair process of a simple fracture takes place in four p hases:
1. Hematoma Formation :  When a bone breaks, the blood vessels in the bone itself, and perha ps 
in surrounding are torn resulting in hemorrhage. As a result,  a hematoma, a mass of clotted blood, 
forms at the fracture site. Soon after, bone cell deprived of food begi n to die and the tissue at the 
fracture site becomes swollen and hence painful.
2. Soft Callus Formation : Next “soft callus” begins to form in 3-4 weeks. Capillaries grow into the 
hematoma and clear up the debris. Fibroblasts and osteoblasts m igrate into the fracture site and 
begin to construct bone.
3. Bony Callus Formation : Osteoblasts and osteoclasts continue to migrate inward, multiply 
rapidly and gradually convert the soft callus into bony callu s. Bone formation begins 3-4 weeks 
after injury and continues until a irm bony union is formed w ithin 2-3 months later.
4. Remodeling :  After several months bony callus is remodeled by removing the exc ess material on 
the outside of the bone. Final structure of remodeled area resembles tha t of the original unbroken 
bone because it responds to the same set of mechanical stimuli.
MUSCLES
Many multicellular animals have evolved specialized cells for movem ent. These cells contain 
numerous ilaments of special protein actin and myosin. The vertebra te possess three kinds of 
muscle cells, Smooth muscles, skeletal muscles and cardiac mu scles (Fig 16.7)2416. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.7 Location, characteristics, and functions of the th ree muscle types.2516. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Property Smooth Cardiac Skeletal
Muscle appearance Unstriped Irregular stripes Regular stri pes
Cell shape Spindle Branched Spindle or cylindrical
Number of nuclei One per cell Many per cell Many per ce ll
Speed of 
contractionSlow Intermediate Slow to rapid
Contraction caused 
bySpontaneous, 
stretch, nervous 
system, hormonesSpontaneous Nervous system
Function Controls movement 
of substances 
through hollow 
organsPumps blood Moves the skeleton
Voluntary control Usually no Usually no Yes
1. Smooth Muscles
Smooth muscles were the earliest form of muscle to evolve and it is foun d throughout animal 
kingdom. Smooth muscles are long and spindle shape with each c ontaining a single nucleus. It 
has no striations. It is not under the voluntary control. We describ e smooth muscle tissue most 
precisely as visceral, non-striated and involuntary. These musc les are found in the blood vessels, 
digestive tract and many other organs.
2. Cardiac Muscles
These are muscles of the heart. They constitute most of the mass of the h eart walls. Heart muscle 
is composed of chains of single cell, each with its own nucleus . The chain of cells are organized into 
ibres that are branched and interconnected. Key words for this mus cle type are cardiac, striated 
and involuntary2616. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
3. Skeletal Muscles
The muscles that are attached to the skeleton and are associated with th e movement of bones are 
called skeletal muscles. The skeletal muscles are consciously con trolled and therefore, are called 
voluntary muscles. Skeletal muscles are also called striped or s triated muscles because they show 
alternate light and dark bands, e.g., triceps and biceps. Gen erally, each end of the entire muscle is 
attached to bone by a bundle of collagen, non-elastic ibres, known as tendons .
Skeletal Muscle Fibre :  Each muscle consists of muscle bundles, which are further c omposed of 
muscle ibres or cells. Each muscle ibre is a long cylindri cal cell with multiple oval nuclei arranged 
just beneath its sarcolemma. Skeletal muscle ibres are huge cells.  Their diameter is 10 - 100 mm. 
Sarcoplasm of the muscle ibre is similar to the cytoplasm of other cells but it contains usually large 
amount of stored glycogen and unique oxygen bonding protein myoglob in, a red pigment that 
stores oxygen.
When viewed in high magniication, each muscle ibre is seen to con tain a large number of myoibrils 
1-2 mm in diameter that run in parallel fashion and extend entire len gth of the cell. Bundles of these 
ibrils are enclosed by the muscle cell membrane or sarcolemma. T he myoibrils consist of smaller 
contractile units called sarcomere. In each sarcomere a series of dark and light band are evident 
along the length of each myoibril. Each dark band is called A band , because it is anisotropic, i.e it 
can polarize visible light. The light band called I band  is isotropic or non-polarizing. It gives the cell 
as a whole its striped appearance. Each A band  has a lighter stripe in its mid section called H - zone 
(H stands for “hele” mean bright). The H-zone is bisected by da rk line called M - line. The I bands 
have mid line called Z - line (Z for zwishen means between).
A sarcomere is the region of a myoibril between two successive Z - li nes and is the smallest 
contractile unit of muscle ibre. The myoibrils contain myoilaments .2716. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 16.8 Ultrastructure of skeletal muscle iber2816. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Infrastructure of Myoilament :  Myoilament is made up of thick and thin ilaments. The 
central thick ilaments extend the entire length of the A-band. The thin  ilaments extend across the 
I-band and partly into A band. 
The thick ilament which is about 16 nm in diameter is composed of myosin. Each myosin molecule 
has a tail terminating in two globular heads. Myosin tail con sists of two long polypeptide chains 
coiled together. The heads are sometimes called cross bridges  because they link the thick and the 
thin myoilaments together during contraction (Fig. 16.8).
Thin ilaments are 7 - 8 nm thick and are composed chiely of a ctin molecule. The actin molecules 
are arranged in two chain which twist around each other like a twisted double strand of pearls. 
Twisting around the actin chains are two strands of another protein , tropomyosin.  The other major 
protein in thin ilament is troponin. It is actually three polypeptid e complex, one binds to actin, 
another binds to tropomyosin while third binds calcium ions. Ea ch myosin ilament is surrounded 
by six actin ilaments on each end.
Sliding Filament Model 
When muscle ibre contracts, the thin and thick ilaments undergo s hifting. The I-band reduces in 
length and Z-line gets closer. 
Huxley and A. F. Huxley and their colleagues suggested a hyp othesis in 1954 to explain all events 
in muscle contraction, this is called “Sliding ilament model” of muscle contraction. According to 
this theory, the thin ilaments slide past the thick one so that actin a nd myosin ilaments overlap to 
greater degree. Thus the Z-line is brought close together, I-band shor tens, the H zone disappears. 
In this process of contraction, the cross bridges of thick ilament become attached to binding sites 
on the actin ilament. The cross bridges then contract to pull the acti n ilament towards the center 
of the sarcomere.2916. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
How the bridges are controlled
When the muscle is at rest, the tropomyosin is disposed in such a way that it covers the sites on the 
actin chain where the head of myosin becomes attached. When the musc le is required to contract, 
calcium ions bind with the troponin molecule and cause them to move s lightly. This has the efect 
of displacing the tropomyosin and exposing the binding sites for  the myosin head. Once the myosin 
head has become attached to the actin ilament, ATP is hydrolysed an d the bridge goes to its cycle. 
This ATP is provided by the large number of mitochondria presen t in each muscle cell.
From the above account it is revealed that ATP is needed to break the lin k between the myosin  and 
the actin. After death, the amount of ATP in the body falls. Under these circumstances the bridges 
can not be broken and so they remain irmly bound. This results in the body becoming stif, a 
condition known as rigor mortis.
Controlling the Actin - Myosin Interaction By Ca++ ions
Muscle contraction is initiated by nerve impulse arriving at the neu romuscular junction. All the ibres 
innervated by a single motor neuron are a “motor unit” and contract s imultaneously in response 
to the action potential ired by the motor neurons. The sarcolemma of musc le ibre penetrates 
deep into the cell to form hollow elongated tube, the transverse tubule, T -tubule the lumen of 
which is continuous with the extracellular luid. The thousands of T - tubules of each muscle cell are 
collectively called T-system. It extends and encircles the myoibril at the level of Z-line or A and I - 
junction. The T-tubule and the terminal portion of the adjacent envel ope of sarcoplasmic reticulum 
form triads at regular intervals along the length of the ibril. Th e nerve impulse is carried through 
the T-tubule to the adjacent sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The calcium gates of the SR open releasing 
calcium into the cytosol, thus binding calcium ion to troponin mol ecules of the thin ilament. The 
binding sites are exposed and cross bridges with myosin can  form, and contraction occurs.
All or None Response : The contraction of each muscle ibre is based on “all or none” pri nciple 
i.e. all of its ibrils participate in contraction. The degree of c ontraction depends upon the number 
of muscle ibers that participate in contraction.3016. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Energy For Muscle Contraction
Energy for muscle contraction comes from the ATP. Supply of ATP  is. maintained by the aerobic 
breakdown of glucose in muscle cell, which comes from stored gl ycogen in the cell. When more 
energy is required due to high metabolism, it is provided by anothe r energy storing substance 
called creatine phosphate. Sometime during 
oxygen deiciency or very high metabolic 
activity such as (prolonged or strenuous 
muscular activity), ATP requirement is met 
by anaerobic breakdown of glucose into 
Lactic acid. Lactic acid accumulation causes 
muscle fatigue. At rest, 1/5 of the lactic acid 
is broken aerobically and its energy is used 
to change the remaining 4/5 lactic acid into 
glucose.
Muscle Fatigue
Muscle fatigue is a state of physiological 
inability to contract. Muscle fatigue results 
from relative deicit of ATP. When no 
ATP is available, contractures or states of 
continuous contraction result because the 
cross bridges are unable to detach. Excess 
accumulation of lactic acid and ionic imbalance also contri bute to muscle fatigue. Lactic acid, which 
causes muscle pH to drop (and the muscle to ache) causes extreme f atigue by breaking glucose.Efect of Exercise on Muscle
The amount of work a muscle does is relected in 
changes in the muscle itself. When muscles are 
used actively, they increase in size or strength 
and become more eicient and fatigue resistant. 
Aerobic exercises such as swimming, jogging , and 
fast walking result in several changes in skeletal 
muscles. Capillaries surrounding the muscle ibres, 
as well as mitochondria within them increase in 
number and ibre synthesizes more myoglobin. 
These changes result in more eicient muscle 
metabolism and resitance to fatigue. Complete 
immobilization of muscle leads to muscle weakness 
and severe atrophy.Sarcoplasmic Reticulum (S.R) is continuous system of sarco-tub ules extending throughout the 
sarcoplasm around each myoibril. It is like endoplasmic retic ulum but devoid of ribosomes and 
exhibits a highly specialized repeating pattern.3116. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Tetany
Tetany is the disease caused by low calcium in the blood. It inc reases the excitability of neurons 
and results in loss of sensations. Muscle twitches and convulsion  occur. If untreated the system 
progresses to spasm of larynx, respiratory paralysis and ulti mately death occurs.
Cramp
It is also known as tetanic contraction of the entire muscle: It las ts for just a few seconds to several 
hours, causing the muscles to become taut and painful. It is mos t common in thigh and hip muscles, 
it usually occurs at night or after exercise. It relects low blood s ugar level, electrolyte depletion, 
dehydration irritability of spinal cord and neurons.
ARRANGEMENT OF SKELETAL MUSCLES FOR MOVEMENT OF 
SKELETON
Skeletal muscle has three parts: origin  is the end of muscle which remains ixed when muscle 
contracts, insertion is the end of the muscle that moves the bone, and belly  is thick part between 
origin and insertion, which contracts.
Connective tissue  binds other tissues and helps 
to maintain body form by holding the various 
organs together. Connective tissue ibrils have 
two specialized kinds. Ligaments  attach bone 
to bone and are slightly elastic. Tendons  attach 
muscles to bones and are non-elastic.
Movement of Bones
The majority of muscle tissue in your body is 
skeletal muscle. The skeletal muscles produce 
movements by pulling on tendons, cords of 
connective tissues that anchor muscle to the 
bones. The tendons then pull on bones. Most 
muscles pass across a joint and are attached to 
the bones that form joints. When such a muscle 
contracts, it draws one bone towards or away from the bone with whi ch it articulates.
There are 650 muscles in human body, most of which occur in pairs. At joint, these muscles work 
against each other by contraction. This relationship is called antagonism.Tetanus:  The term tetanus is used for an 
acute infectious disease caused by anaerobic 
bacterium Clostridium tetani  resulting in 
persistant painful spasms of some skeletal 
muscles. Typically begins  gradually  with 
stifness of jaws and neck muscles and 
progresses to ixed rigidity of jaws (lock jaw) 
and spasms of trunk and limb muscles, usually 
fatal due to respiratory failure. Though rare 
in developed countries, the tetanus is the 
major killer in developing countries where the 
mortality rate is 40 percent.3216. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
The best example is the movement of elbow joint by biceps and tricep s. The biceps bends the arm 
at the elbow joint, and triceps straightens it. The biceps brach ii muscle arises by the two heads 
from scapula and is inserted into the medial surface of the rad ius bone. The other two muscles 
lie below the biceps brachi. The two muscles are brachialis a nd brachioradialis. The brachialis is 
inserted in the ulna, while brachioradialis is inserted in th e radius. When these muscles contract 
they lift radius and ulna and bend the arm at the elbow. When  triceps contracts it straightens arm 
at elbow. In the antagonistic pairs one muscle reverses the efect of the oth er and they do not 
contract simultaneously. 
Fig: 16.9 Working of hinge joint at elbowLevered movement. Rigid external or internal skeletons are attached to muscl es, which move 
parts of the skeleton at movable joints. Each bony “lever” is moved by a n antagonistic muscle 
pair. One muscle reverses the action of the other, so that the lever can r eturn to its original 
position.3316. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
LOCOMOTION IN PROCTOCTISTA AND INVERTEBRATES
There is an immense variety of organisms with diferent modes of locom otion.
Locomotion In Euglena
Euglena moves with the help of lagellum. As the lagellum is whip ped backwards, the organism 
moves forward. However, when the lagellum moves forward Euglena does n ot move backward. 
Locomotary lagellum is at the anterior end of the body and pulls the organism forward. Waves of 
activity are generated by the lagellum itself, and they pass in a spiral fashion from its base to its tip. 
They increase amplitude and velocity. The activity note of the lagellum  causes the body of Euglena 
to rotate forward about its axis. Euglena is able to change its di rection by the active contractile 
myonemes which run along the length of its body. When they contrac t the shape of the body as 
well as its direction changes. First the body becomes short and wider at the anterior end then in the 
middle and later at the posterior end. This characteristic movement i s called Euglenoid movement.
Locomotion in Paramecium
Paramecium moves with the help of cilia. This is called cilia ry movement. All the cilia do not move 
simultaneously, a bunch of cilia moves in a progressive wave-li ke manner at a time. The wave starts 
at the anterior end and progresses backward.
Cilia are short, ine thread-like extensions of the cell membrane. Th e length of cilia ranges from 
many microns to many hundred microns and the diameter varies fr om 0.1 to 0.5. m.
A cilium consists of nine peripheral double ibrils, giving th e appearance of 8-shaped igure and two 
central smaller ibrils. All these ibrils run longitudinally  through the cilium. These are covered with 
the extensions of the membrane.3416. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
The exact mechanism of movement of cilia is not known. However in 195 5 Bradford suggested that 
movement of cilia is due to the simultaneous contraction or sliding of double ibrils in two groups 
one after the other.
1. Five out of nine (5/9) double ibrils contract or slide simultaneous ly with the result that cilium     
bend or shorten. It is called efective stroke.
2. The four out of nine(4/9) double ibrils contract and cilium bec omes, straight. It is called recovery 
stroke.
As a result of bending and recovery strokes the Paramecium swi ms against water the energy for 
the movement of cilia is provided from the ATP. The enzyme present in th e cilia breaks up ATP to 
release energy.
The action of the cilia is coordinated and all the cilia beat togethe r in a sequence to propel the 
animal in one direction.
Locomotion in Amoeba
In Amoeba movement takes place by means of pseudopodia. The pseudopod ia are inger-like 
projections thrown in the direction of low of the cytoplasm consequently,  the body moves in that 
direction (Fig 16.10). The exact mechanism of formation of pseud opodia is still debatable.3516. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Locomotion in Jelly Fish
Jellyish has an umbrella - like body called bell. First of all water enters in the bell then the bell 
contracts, the water is forced out like a jet and the animal moves forw ard (Fig 16.11). This movement 
is known as jet propulsion.
Fig: 16.10: Amoeba showing amoeboid movement
Fig. 16.11 Jelly ish showing movement by Jet propulsion3616. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Locomotion in Earthworm
Earthworm shows accordion like movement, in which setae and mus cles both are involved (Fig 
16.12). First of all earthworm becomes long and thin. The seta e present on the lower side of anterior 
end come out, anchor and hold this end irmly. The longitudinal muscles now contract and circular 
muscles relax and body shortens thus pulling this portion forwa rd. Then the setae of the posterior 
end come out and ix the animal on the ground. Now circular musc les contract, longitudinal muscles 
relax and body becomes thin and long. In this way, earthworm moves from one place to the other.
Fig: 16.12 An earthworm crawling, by peristalsis3716. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Locomotion in Cockroach
The mode of locomotion in cockroach is swift walking but it also ta kes to light by its wings. In 
walking, the legs are used on one side, the foreleg pulls the body  forward and the hind leg pushes 
it in the same direction. The middle leg of the opposite side acts a s a prop. In the mean time, the 
remaining three legs begin to move together and the process is repeated.
Out of the two pairs, the posterior pair of wings brings about the l ight. These beat in air in such a 
manner that they support the body weight and drive it through the air .
Locomotion in Snail
Snails and mussels are mollusks, which crawl or move very sl owly by “foot”.
Locomotion in Star Fish
Starish moves with the help of tube feet. The tube feet are present on both si des of radial canal that 
extends upto the tip of arm. The tube feet extend when water is pumped in to them, then they ix 
themselves by suction cup to some object. Later on they shorten and pul l the body in this direction. 
In this way, the starish moves in any direction. Arms of the star ish also help in swimming.
LOCOMOTION AND SKELETON IN VERTEBRATES
In vertebrates, skeletal muscles and skeleton help in locomotion.
Swimming in Fishes
Swimming in water presents very diferent problems from walking on  land like man or lying in 
air like birds. The body of most ishes is streamlined, being ta pered at both ends. This means that 
water lows readily over the body surface and friction is reduced to a minimum. Apart from the 
ins no other structures project from the body of ish and its seems tha t faster the ish, the more 
perfect is the stream lined. The dermal denticles of cartilaginous ish and the scales of bony ish 
are kept moist by slimy exudation from mucus or oil glands and  this also considerably reduces 
friction between ish and water. Other adaptations proceed by ish for  moving eiciently through 
the water are the ins. The dorsal and ventral, unpaired ins help to stablize the ish, the paired 
pectoral and pelvic ins are used for steering and balancing the animals, and caudal or tail in, in 
coordination with paired ins provide forward movement of ish through water. Buoyancy in the 
water is maintained by a specialized structure in bony ish ca lled swim bladder.
Locomotion In Amphibian
The general build of body is essentially ish - like in amphi bians. Such forms have two means of 
locomotion. They wriggle along their belly on the ground with the h elp of segmentally arranged 
muscles as.they “swim on land”, with legs hardly touching th e ground when moving deliberately. 
On the other hand, a few raise up their body on the legs which  then propel them along as movable 
levers.3816. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
In the anurans, the entire skeleton and muscular system has become specialized for the peculiar 
swimming and jumping methods of locomotion; by means of extensor th rusts of both kind of 
limbs, acting together.
Frogs and toads also walk and hop on land due to its strong hin d limbs.
Locomotion In Reptiles
The life style of reptiles reveals striking adaptations for locomotion . They move better than 
amphibians due to the evolution of skeleton. The reptiles use method of wa lking and running. 
The general form of the reptilian skeleton is based on one inherited f rom ancient amphibians. The 
skeleton is highly ossiied to provide greater support.
Reptiles have cervical vertebrae. The irst two cervical vertebrae (atlas an d axis) provide greater 
freedom of movement for head. The axis is modiied for rotational movement. The ribs of reptiles 
may be highly modiied. The ribs of snakes have muscular conn ections to large belly scales to aid 
locomotion. Many prehistoric reptiles were bipedal meaning that th ey walked on hind limbs. They 
had a narrow pelvis and heavy out stretched tail for balance. B ipedal locomotion freed the front 
appendages, which became adapted for prey capture or light in s ome animals.
Locomotion in Air
The skeleton of a bird is modiied for light. The most obvious adapta tions are the bones with large 
air spaces which make them lighter.
The fore limbs evolved into wings with very strong pectoral muscles wh ich pull the wings up and 
down. The sternum is modiied to form keel. The keel is needed for the a ttachment of muscles.
The body is covered with feathers which give the wing a large su rface area to keep the birds in air. 
They also keep their bodies warm, so that they can produce enough ener gy to ly.
The body is streamlined to cut clearly through the air. The feath ers lie smoothly against its body, so 
that the air can easily low over them. A bird can ly either passi vely by gliding or actively by lapping 
its wings.3916. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Passive light;  When birds glide, the wings act as aerofoils. An aerofoils i s any smooth surface 
which moves through the air at an angle,to the airstream. The air l ows over the wing in such a way 
that the bird is given lift; the amount of lift depends on the angle at which the wing is held relative 
to the airstream.
Active light:  When little or no support can be gained from upward air currents , the same efect 
can be achieved by lapping the wings. As the birds moves through  the air, the air lows more 
quickly over the curved upper surface than over the lower surface. T his reduces the air pressure on 
the top of the wing, compared with air pressure below the wing. Th ere is, therefore, a net upward 
pressure on the wing which gives lift to the bird.
Locomotion in Mammals
The most eicient way of supporting the body is seen in mammals. T he limbs of the mammals have 
undergone further modiications to produce the following modes of locomotion .
1. Plantigrade :  In this mode of locomotion the mammals walk on their soles with pa lm, wrist, 
and digits all resting more or less on ground, such as monkeys , apes, man and bear etc.
2. Digitigrade : Some mammals tend to walk on their digits only. They run faster than plantigrade 
animals. In these mammals, irst digit usually reduces or com pletely lost as in rabbit, rodents etc.
3. Unguligrade : These mammals walk on the tips of toes modiied into hoof as deer, goat.  It is 
the most swift type of locomotion.4016. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Evloutionary changes in the arrangement of bones
and related mode of locomotion in major groups of vert ebrates
All vertebrates have a common body plan and have skeleton formed of the same basic parts, 
but there are many diferences. Some of these can be related to changes i n habitat for example, 
support and locomotion in sea requires adaptations which difer fr om those needed on land or in 
air. Most ishes are propelled forward by means of muscle contrac tion which pass along the body 
from anterior to posterior producing a characteristic S-band locomoti on. Alternate contractions on 
both side produce lashing movements which drive the ish forward thr ough the water. This type of 
motion is seen in cartilaginous ish like dog ish and sharks.
Most land vertebrates are tetrapods. In four footed amphibians and reptiles, the legs emerged 
from the sides of the body and the S-wriggle is retained as a p art of the body. Girdles and limbs of 
tetrapods show clear cut homologies in fundamental structure.
The tetrapod pelvic girdle is united irmly to the sacral region of th e vertebral column. It is composed 
on each side of three cartilaginous bones ilium, ischium, pubi s. A depression, the acetabulum 
usually located at the point of junction of three bones, furnishes the articular surface for the femur. 
The limbs of tetrapods are fundamentally similar, fore and hin d-limbs are also alike.
The tetrapod limb is primitively pentadactyle. Reduction and fusion  accounts for many variations 
from the primitive condition that are encountered. For example in the ca se of mammalian locomotion 
the legs project beneath the body providing more efective support. In runn ing mammal, stride 
length and power are increased by arching the spine irst upwar d with the limbs fully extended, in 
this way the force produced by the back muscle is transmitted to g round.
Flight has evolved in three types of vertebrates namely in pterodactyls,  birds and bats. It involves 
far more muscular efort than swimming and walking or runni ng.4116. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
To generate suicient lift to remain air-borne a lying organism mu st have wings with a large 
surface area in contact with the air and must beat its wings pow erfully. The skeleton of birds 
is highly modiied for light. Among the more obvious adaptations ar e the enlargements of the 
pectoral girdle and the development of sternum to form a massive keel for the attachment of 
light muscles. The supra-coracoid muscles provide power for tlhe upward stroke. The lifting action 
is possible because the tendon of the supra- coracoid muscles p asses through an opening the 
formen triosseum formed between the scapula coracoid and clavicle bones and is attached to the 
upper surface of the humerus. The number of bones is reduced as  compared to those in the limbs 
of other vertebrates and many bones are fused together to increase strength.
The shape of the wings greatly inluences the speed and the type of li ght which can be achieved. 
For example long narrow wings like those of gulls and other sea b irds are ideal for gliding into wind. 
While short broad wings like those of many garden birds are efec tive for slow lapping light. Bats 
have a quite diferent arrangement of wing bones but show a parallel  range of adaptation for light.4216. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
  Exercise
                                                             
Q.1       Fill in the blanks:
(i)          Each muscle is enclosed by a membrane known as _____________________.
(ii)         Osteoporois in caused by the decrease in the level  of _________________________.
(iii)        The “molting” is controlled by a hormone _______ ________________.
(iv)        __________________ is stored in the muscle cell  as reserve food.
(V)         Collenchymatous cells lack _________________  in their primary wall.
(vi)        There are _______________________ vertebrae in the neck region of mammals.
(vii)       The most abundant proteins in the muscle are _____ ___________________.
(viii)      _____________________________ connect a mus cle to a bone.
(ix)        Thick muscle ilament is composed of __________ ______________.
Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and w rite the correct statement if false. 
(i)          The shoulder joint is a hinge joint.
(ii)         Tendons connect bones together at joints.
(iii)        Arthritis often accompanies aging.
(iv)        Calcium provides energy to the muscle contraction.
(v)         Most of the sclerenchymatous cells are non-living.
(vi)        Visceral muscle are striated, involuntary and smooth .4316. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Q.4      Short questions?
(i)         What is the cause of cramps?
(ii)        What is the diference between tetanus and muscle tetany?
(iii)       What is a ligament?
(iv)       What is “nutation”?
(v)        How many ribs do not attach with the sternum?
(vi)       How is rickets produced?
(vii)      What is the cause of tetanus?
(viii)     How is muscle fatigue produced?
(ix)       Distinguish between the following.
(a)        Axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton.
(b)        Phototactic and chemotactic stimulus.
(c)        Osteocytes and osteoblast.
(d)        Brachialis and brachioradialis.
(e)        Origin and insertion of muscles.
(f)         Bone and cartilage.
(g)        Troponin and tropomyosin.4416. Support and Movement eLearn.Punjab
Q.5.     Extensive questions.
(i)         What are the disadvantages of exoskeleton?
(ii)        What is the sliding ilament model? What does it exp lain?
(iii)       Describe a hinge joint and explain how it is moved by antagonistic muscle.
(iv)       Deine joints. How are they classiied? Explain.
(v)        Explain appendicular skeleton with the help of a d iagram.
(vi)       Draw and label the human skull.
(vii)      Write the major evolutionary adaptation in the lines of tetrapod. .
(viii)     Deine secondary growth. Explain.
(ix)       What are the main diferences between exoskeleton and endosk eleton.
(x)        List the functions of skeleton.
(xi)       Explain the role of osteoclasts in remodeling of bone an d describe the structure of 
             compact bone.
(xii)      List the main parts of axial skeleton.
(xiii)     Distinguish between ibrous, cartilaginous and syn ovial joints.
(xiv)     Discuss methods of locomotion in ish, land vertebrates and  birds.