CHAPTER
20
 CHROMOSOMES AND
DNA
Animation 20:: Growth and development
Source & Credit: Wikipedia220.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 20.1 Human chromosomes   
Chromosomes are thread like structures that appear inside the nucleu s at the time of cell division. 
They were irst observed by the German embryologist Walther Fleming in 1882, when he was 
examining the rapidly dividing cells of salamander larvae. S ince their discovery, chromosomes have 
been found in the cells of all eukaryotes. Their number however varies  from species to species. 
Pencillium,  a fungus, has only one pair of chromosomes, while some ferns h ave more than 500 pairs. 
A mosquito has 6, honeybee 32, corn 20, sugarcane 80, frog 26  and a mouse has 40 chromosomes. 
Human cells have 46 chromosomes, consisting of 23 pairs (Fig 20.1). Each of these 46 chromosomes 
contains hundreds or thousands of genes that play important roles i n determining how a person’s 
body develops and functions. The possession of all these chromosomes i s therefore, essential 
for survival. Missing of a part or whole of chromosome leads to seri ous consequences, and death 
occurs.320.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
TYPES OF CHROMOSOMES
Typically, a chromosome is made of chromatids, centromere, (primary constriction), 
and a secondary constriction (Fig 20.2).
Chromosomes may widely difer in appearance. They vary i n size, staining properties, 
the location of centromere,  relative length of  two arms on eithe r side of centromere, 
and the position of constricted regions along the arms. The pa rticular array of 
chromosomes that an individual possesses is called its kary otype (Fig 20.3). Karyotypes 
show marked diferences among species and sometimes even among individuals of 
the same species.
The chromosomes are called telocentric, acrocentric, sub me tacentric and metacentric
 depending upon the location of centromere between the middle  and tip of the 
chromosomes.
Fig 20.2 Structure of chromosome420.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
These chromosomes- acquire diferent shapes at the time of a naphase during cell 
division. The usual shapes are i, j and v.Fig. 20.4 Shapes of chromosomes depends upon the location of ce ntromereFig. 20.3 A human karyotype520.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
COMPOSITION OF CHROMOSOME
Chromosomes are composed of DNA and protein. Most are about 40% DNA and 60% 
protein. A signiicant amount of RNA is also associated with c hromosomes, because 
these are the sites of RNA synthesis. The DNA of a chromosome  is one very long, double 
stranded iber that extends unbroken through the entire leng th of the chromosome. 
A typical human chromosome contains about 140 million (1.4 x  108) nucleotides in 
its DNA. The amount of information, one chromosome contains would ill about 280 
printed books of 1000 pages each, if each nucleotide corre sponds to a word and each 
page had about 500 words on it. Further more, if the strand of DNA from a single 
chromosome were laid out in a straight line, it would be abou t 5 centimeter long. 
Fitting such a strand into a small space of nucleus is na ture’s marvel - and that’s only 1 
of 46 chromosomes. In the cell, however, the DNA is coiled al lowing it to it into a much 
smaller space than would otherwise be possible.
How can this long DNA ibre coil so tightly? If we gently dis rupt a eukaryotic nucleus 
and examine the DNA with an electron microscope, we ind tha t it resembles a string 
of beads (Fig 20.5). Every 200 nucleotides, the DNA duple x is coiled around a core 
of eight histone proteins forming a complex known as a nucle osome. Unlike most 
proteins, which have an overall negative charge, histones ar e positively charged due 
to an abundance of the basic amino acids arginine and ly sine. They are thus strongly 
attracted to the negatively charged phosphate groups of the DNA. The histone cores 
thus act as magnetic forms that promote and guide the coiling of the DNA. Further 
coiling occurs when the string of nucleosomes wraps up into higher order coils called 
supercoils.
Highly condensed portions of the chromatin are called heterochromatin . Some of 
these portions remain permanently condensed, so that their DNA  is never expressed. 
The remainder of the chromosome called euchromatin  is condensed only during cell 
division,620.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 20.5 Levels of eukaryotic chromosomal organization
 
when compact packaging facilitates the movement of the chromosom es. At all other 
times, euchromatin is present in an open coniguration and i ts genes can be 125  
expressed. The way, chromatin is packaged when the cel l is not dividing is not well 
understood beyond the level of nucleosomes and is a topic of in tensive research.720.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
THE CHROMOSOMAL THEORY OF INHERITANCE
A central role for chromosomes in heredity was irst suggeste d in 1900 by the German 
geneticist Karl Correns, in one of the papers announcing th e rediscovery of Mendel’s work. 
Soon after, observations that similar chromosomes paired with one  another during meiosis 
led directly to the chromosomal theory of inheritance, irst form ulated by the American 
Walter Sutton in 1902.
Several pieces of evidence supported Sutton’s theory. One was  that reproduction involves 
the initial union of only two cells, egg and sperm. If Men del’s model was correct, then these 
two gametes must make equal hereditary contributions. Sperm,  however, contain little 
cytoplasm, suggesting that the hereditary material must resi de within the nuclei of the 
gametes. Furthermore, while diploid individuals have two cop ies of each pair of homologous 
chromosomes, gametes have only one. This observation was consis tent with Mendel’s model, 
in which diploid individuals have two copies of each herita ble gene and gametes have one. 
Finally, chromosomes segregate during meiosis, and each pair of homologue orients on the 
metaphase plate independently of every other pair.
There is however one problem with this theory. If Mendelian  characters are determined by 
genes located on the chromosomes, and if the independent ass ortment of Mendelian traits 
relects the independent assortment of chromosomes in meiosis, why does the number of 
characters that assort independently in a given kind of orga nism often greatly exceed the 
number of chromosome pairs the organism possesses? This ha s led many early researchers 
to have serious reservations about Sutton’s theory.
In 1910 Thomas Hunt Morgan, studying the fruit ly, Drosphil a melanogaster, detected a 
mutant male ly, one that difered strikingly from normal lie s of the same species its eyes 
were white instead of red.
Morgan crossed mutant male to a normal female. All F1 progeny had red eyes. He 
then crossed red eyed lies from F1 generation with each other. Of the 4252 F2 progeny 
Morgan examined, 782 (18%) had white eyes. Although the ratio of red eyes to white 
eyes in the F2 progeny was greater than 3:1, the results of the cross neve rtheless 
provided clear evidence that eye colour segregates.820.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 2Q.6 Morgan’s experiment demonstrating the chromosomal basi s of Sex linkage.
   
 However, there was something about the outcome that was strange and totally 
unpredicted by Mendel’s theory - all of the white eyed F2 lies were male!920.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
How could this result be explained? Perhaps it was imposs ible for a white eyed female 
ly to exist; such individuals might not be viable for some un known reason. To test this 
idea, Morgan test crossed the female F1 progeny with the original white eyed male. He 
obtained both white-eyed and red-eyed males and females in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, just as 
Mendelian theory predicted. Hence a female could have wh ite eyes. Why, then were 
there no white eyed females among the progeny of the origina l cross?
The solution to this puzzle involved sex. The gene causing th e white eye trait in 
Drosophila resides only on the X chromosome. It is absent from the Y chromosome. A 
trait determined by a gene on the X chromosome is said to be sex linked. Knowing that 
the white eye trait is recessive to the red eye trait, the Morg an’s result was a natural 
consequence of the Mendelian assortment of chromosomes (Fig 2 0.6).
Morgan’s experiment was one of the most important in the history  of genetics because 
it presented the irst clear evidence that the genes determin ing Mendelian traits do 
indeed reside on the chromosomes, as Sutton had proposed. The  chromosome theory
of inheritance therefore, propounds that genes are located on chromosomes. The 
segregation of the white-eye trait has one-to-one correspondence  with the segregation 
of the X chromosome, in other words, Mendelian traits such as  eye colour in Drosophila 
assort independently because chromosomes do.
DNA AS HEREDITARY MATERIAL
The irst evidence of hereditary nature of DNA was provided b y a British microbiologist 
Frederick Griith who made some unexpected observations while  experimenting with 
pathogenic bacteria. When he infected mice with a virulen t strain of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae bacteria (then known as Pneumococcus), the mice died of bl ood poisoning. 
However, when he infected similar mice with a mutant strai n of S. pneumoniae that 
lacked the virulent strains polysaccharide coat, the mice s howed no ill efects. The coat 
was apparently necessary for virulence.1020.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
The normal pathogenic form of this bacterium is referred to as the S form because it 
forms smooth colonies on a culture dish. The mutant forms, whi ch lacks an enzyme 
needed to manufacture the polysaccharide coat, is called th e R form because it forms 
rough colonies.
To determine whether the polysaccharide coat itself had a tox ic efect. Griith injected 
dead bacteria of the virulent S strain into the mice; the mic e remained perfectly 
healthy. As a control, he injected mice with a mixture conta ining dead S bacteria of 
the virulent strain and live coatless R bacteria, each of wh ich by itself did not harm the 
mice (Fig 20.7). Unexpectedly, the mice developed the dis ease symptoms and many 
of them died. The blood of the dead mice was found to contain high levels of live, 
virulent streptococcus type S bacteria, which had surface p roteins characteristic of 
the live (previously R) strain. Somehow, the information speci fying the polysaccharide 
coat had passed from the dead, virulent S bacteria to the live , coatless R bacteria in the 
mixture, permanently transforming the coatless R bacteria i nto the virulent S variety. 
Transformation is the transfer of. genetic material from one cell to another and can 
alter the genetic make up of the recipient cell.
Fig 20.7 Griith’s discovery of transformation1120.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
The agent responsible for transforming Streptococcus went und iscovered until 1944. 
In a classic series of experiments, Oswald Avery along with Colin Macleod and 
Maclyn McCarty characterized what they referred to as the “Transforming principle”. 
They irst prepared mixture of dead S Streptococcus and live  R Streptococcus that 
Griith had used. Then they removed as much of the protein as  they could from 
their preparation, eventually achieving 99.98% purity. Desp ite removal of nearly all 
the  protein, the transforming activity was not reduced. Moreover , the properties of  
transforming principle resembled those of DNA. The protein digesting enzymes or RNA 
digesting enzymes did not afect the principle’s activity, b ut the DNA digesting enzyme 
DNase destroyed all the transforming activity.
Additional evidence supporting Avery’s conclusion was provide d in 1952 by Alfred 
Hershey and Martha Chase who experimented with bacterioph ages T2. In some 
experiments they labelled viruses with radio isotope 32P, w hich was incorporated into 
the  newly synthesized DNA of grooving phage. In other exper iments, the viruses were 
grown on a medium containing 35S, an isotope of sulphur whi ch is incorporated into 
the amino acids of newly synthesized protein coats.
After the labelled viruses were permitted to infect bacteria , the bacterial cells were 
agitated violently to remove the protein coats of the infecting virus es from the surfaces 
of the bacteria. This procedure removed nearly all of the 3 5S  label from the bacteria.
However the 32P label had transferred to  the interior of the  bacteria (Fig 20.8) and 
was found in viruses subsequently released from the infe cted bacteria. Hence, the 
hereditary information injected into the bacteria that speciie d the new generation 
of viruses was  DNA and not protein.
Animation 20.2: DNA 
Source & Credit: Mr.Birnbaum’s Biology1220.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig 20.8 the Hershey and chase experiment1320.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Chemical Nature of DNA
A German Chemist, Friedrich Miescher, discovered DNA in 1869, only four 
years after Mendel’s work was published. Miescher extr acted a white substance from 
the nuclei of human cells and ish sperm. He called thi s substance “nuclein” because it 
seemed to be speciically associated with the nucleus.
Since nuclein was acidic, it came to be known as nuclei c acid. For 50 years biologists 
did little research on the substance, because nothing was known of its function in cells. 
In 1920’s, the basic structure of nucleic acids was dete rmined by the biochemist P.A. 
Levene, who found that DNA contains three main components (Fig 20.9) : (1) phosphate 
(P04) groups, (2) ive carbon sugars, and (3) nitrogen con taining bases called purines 
(adenine, A, and guanine, G) and pyrimidines (thymine , T and cytosine, C, RNA contains 
uracil, U instead of T). Levene concluded that DNA and RNA molecules are made of 
repeating units called nucleotides. In a nucleotide nitroge n base is attached to carbon 
number 1 of a pentose sugar and phosphate group is attached  to carbon number 5 of 
the sugar. In addition a free hydroxyl (-OH) group is atta ched to the 3’ carbon atom (Fig 
20.10). The 5 ‘phosphate and 3’ hydroxyl groups allow DNA  and RNA to form long chains 
of nucleotides, because these two groups can react chemical ly with each other. The 
reaction between the phosphate group of one nucleotide and the hydroxyl group of 
another is a dehydration synthesis, eliminating a water mol ecule and forming a covalent 
bond that links the two groups (Fig 20.11). The linkage is  called a phosphodiester bond 
because the phosphate group is now linked to the two sugars b y means of a pair of 
ester (P-O-C) bonds. The two unit polymer resulting from thi s reaction still has a free 
5’ phosphate group at one end and a free 3’ hydroxyl group  at the other, so that it can 
link to other nucleotides. In this way, many thousands of nuc leotides can join together 
in long chains. Linear strands of DNA or RNA no matter how l ong, will almost always 
have a free 5’ phosphate group at one end and a free 3’hy droxyl group at the other.1420.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig 20.9 Nucleotide subunits of DNA and 
RNAFig 20.10 Numbering 
the carbon atoms in a 
ncleoties
Fig 20.11 A phosphodiester 
bond.1520.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
’ 
Erwin Chargaf later showed that the amount of adenine in DNA  always equals  the 
amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine always equals the amount of cytosine.  
It also implies that there is always equal proportion of puri ne (A+G) and pyrimidine 
(C+T).
The signiicance of the regularities pointed out by Chargaf  became obvious when a 
British chemist Rosalind Franklin carried on an X-ray d ifraction analysis of DNA.In 
this analysis, a molecule is bombarded with a beam of X-  rays. When individual rays 
encounter atoms their path is bent or difracted and the difra ction pattern is recorded 
on the photographic ilm. When carefully analyzed this patte rn gives three dimensional 
structure of a molecule.
Rosalind Franklin prepared this X- ray difraction pattern  of DNA in the laboratory of 
British Biochemist Maurice Wilkins, who prepared DNA ibe rs. The difraction pattern 
suggested that the DNA molecule had a shape of a helix with  a diameter of 2 nm and a 
complete helical turn every 3.4 nm (Fig 20.12).
Double Helical Structure of DNA (Watson and Crick’s Model)
Learning informally of Franklin’s results, before they w ere published in 1953, James 
Watson and Francis Crick, two young researchers in Univers ity’ of Cambridge, quickly 
worked out a likely structure of the DNA molecule (Fig 20.12 ) which we now know 
was substantially correct. They’ proposed that molecule is a  simple double helix, with 
the basis of two strands pointed inward toward each other. form ing base-pairs. In 
their model, base pairs always consist of purines, which  are large, pointing toward 
pyrimidines which are small, keeping the diameter of th e molecule a constant 2 nm. 
Because hydrogen bonds exist between the bases in a base  pair, the double helix is 
stabilized as a duplex DNA molecule composed of two antipara llel strands, one chain 
running 3’ to 5’ and the other 5’ to 3’. The base pairs ar e planar (lat) and stack 0.34nm 
apart as a result of hyperphobic interactions contributing to th e overall stability of 
the molecule (Fig. 20.3). In the double helix, adenine forms two hydrogen bonds with 
thymine, while guanine forms three hydrogen bonds with cy tosine. Adenine will not form 
proper hydrogen bonds with cytosine.and guanine will not for m hydrogen bonds with 
thymine. Consequently adenine and thymine will always oc cur in the same proportion
in any DNA molecule, as well guanine and cytosine, beca use of this base pairing.1620.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab1720.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
 DNA Replica tion
Fig 20.13 DNA is a double helix1820.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
The Watson - Crick model immediately suggested that the bas is for copying the genetic 
information is complementarity. If one were to unzip the molec ule, one would need 
only to assemble the appropriate complementary nucleotides on the exposed single  
strands to form two daughter complexes with the same sequence s. This form of DNA
replication is called semi-conservative , because while the sequence of the original 
duplex is conserved after one round of replication, the dupl ex itself is not. Instead, 
each strand of the duplex becomes part of another duplex. I n semi-conservative 
replication, the two133 strands of the duplex separate out eac h acting as a model or 
mold, along which new nucleotides are arranged thus givin g rise to two new duplexes. 
In this process by separation of two strands, primary structu re has been conserved, 
whereas the secondary structure has been disrupted.
The other hypotheses of DNA replication were also proposed. Th e conservative model 
stated that the parental double helix would remain intact and  generate DNA copies 
consisting of entirely new molecules. The dispersive model  predicted that parental 
DNA would become completely dispersed and that each strand of all the daughter 
molecules would be a mixture of old and new DNA.
Animation 20.3: DNA Replication
Source & Credit: weloveteaching1920.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
The Meselson - Stahl Experiment
           
  The three hypothesis of DNA replication were evaluated by M athew Meselson and 
Franklin Stahl of the California Institute of Technology in 1 958. They grew bacteria in 
a medium containing heavy isotope of nitrogen, 15N, which became incorporated into 
the bases of the bacterial DNA. After several generations, th e DNA of these bacteria 
was denser than that of bacteria grown in a medium containi ng the lighter isotope of 
nitrogen, N14. Meselson and Stahl then transferred the bacteria from the  N15 medium 
to the N14 medium and collected the DNA at various intervals.
They dissolved the DNA in cesium chloride and then spun i t at a very high speed in 
an ultra-centrifuge. DNA strands of diferent densities got s eparated. The enormous 
centrifugal forces generated by the ultracentrifuge cause d the cesium ions to migrate 
toward the bottom of the centrifuge tube, creating a  gradient of  CsCl, and thus of 
density. Each DNA loats or sinks in the gradient until it re aches the position where its 
density exactly matches the density of cesium there. Beca use N15 strands are denser 
than N14 strands, they migrate farther down the tubes to a denser re gion of the cesium 
chloride gradient.2020.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 20.14 The key result of the Meselson and Stahl exp eriment. The bands on the left side of 
the igure sTiow N 1’ DNA which is heavier and is present  towards the bottom of the tube. The 
middle band is a hybrid DNA band of N1’ and NM and hen ce lies above the Nlr band. This is 
after irst round of replication. In the second round of repl ication, two bands are \isible one at 
the lex el of hybrid band and the other lighter band whic h is N14 band.
The DNA collected immediately after the transfer, was all dense. However, after the 
bacteria completed their irst round of DNA replication in the N 14 medium, the density 
of their DNA had decreased to a value intermediate between N14- DNA and N15 - DNA. 
After the second round of replication, two density classes of DNA were observed one 
intermediate and one equal to that of N14 - DNA (Fig 20.14).
Meselson and Stahl interpreted their results as follows: af ter the irst round of replication, 
each daughter DNA duplex was a hybrid possessing one of the heavy strands of parent 
molecule and one light strand. When this hybrid duplex r eplicated, it contributed one 
heavy strand to form another hybrid duplex and one light stra nd to form a light duplex 
(Fig 20.15). Thus, this experiment clearly conirmed the  prediction of the Watson-Crick 
model that DNA replicates in a semi-conservative manner.
Animation 20.3: Meselson-Sathl Experiment
Source & Credit: weloveteaching2120.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig 20.15 The Meselson and stahl experiment : evidence demonstrting sei-conservative replication2220.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
The Replica tion Process
The DNA replication begins at one or more sites on the DNA mole cule, where there 
is a speciic sequence of nucleotides (Fig 20.16), The DNA polymerase III and other 
enzymes begin a complex process that catalyzes the addition  of nucleotides to the 
growing complementary strands of DNA (Fig 20.17).
FIg 20.16 Origins of replication
Fig 20.18 Molecular structure of DNA polymerse III 
comle2320.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
There are three DNA polymerases namely I, II and III i n bacteria. DNA polymerase I 
is a relatively small enzyme that plays a supporting role in DNA replication. The true 
E.coli replicating enzymes is DNA polymerase III which is 10 times larger and far more 
complex in structure (Fig 20.18). The enzyme is a dime r and catalyzes replication of 
one DNA strand. Polymerase III progressively threads the DNA through the enzyme 
complex, moving at a rapid rate, some 1000 nucleotides / se cond. One of the features 
of the DNA polymerase III is that it can add nucleotides only to a chain of nucleotides  
that is already paired with the parent strands. Hence DNA polymerase cannot initiate 
synthesis on its own. Instead another enzyme, primase, cons tructs an RNA primer, a 
sequence of about 10 RNA nucleotides complementary to the par ent DNA template. 
DNA polymerase IIIrecognizes the primer and adds DNA” nucleotides to it to constr uct 
the DNA strands. The RNA nucleotides in the primers are th en replaced by DNA 
nucleotides.
Fig 20.19 A DNA replication fork2420.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Another feature of DNA polymerase III is that it can add nuc leotides only to the 3’ end of a 
DNA strand. This means that replication always proceeds 5’  —» 3’ direction on a growing 
DNA strand. Because the two parent strands of a DNA molecules  are antiparallel, the 
new strands are oriented in opposite directions (Fig 20.19) . Therefore, the new strands 
must be elongated by diferent mechanisms. Leading strand , which elongates toward 
the replication fork, is built up simply by adding nucle otides continuously to its growing 
3’ end. In contrast the lagging strand which elongates awa y from the replication fork, 
is synthesized discontinuously as a series of short segmen ts that are later connected. 
These segments, called Okazaki fragments are about 100 - 200 nucleotides long in 
eukaryotes and 1000 - 2000 nucleotides long in prokaryotes.  Each Okazaki fragment 
is synthesized by DNA polymerase III in 5’ -> 3’ direc tion, beginning at the replication 
fork and moving away from it. When the polymerase reaches the 5’ end of the lagging 
strand, another enzyme, DNA ligase, attaches the fragment to the lagging strand. The 
DNA is further unwound, new RNA primers are constructed, and DNA polymerase 
III then jumps ahead 1000 - 2000 nucleotides (toward the replication fork) to begin 
constructing another Okazaki fragment.
WHAT IS A GENE?
Archibald Garrod and William Bateson concluded in 1902 th at certain diseases 
among their patients were more prevalent in particular fami lies. By examining several 
generations of these families, Garrod found that some of the di seases behaved as if 
they were the product of simple recessive alleles. He conc luded that these disorders 
were Mendelian traits and that they had resulted from chan ges in the hereditary 
information in an ancestor of the afected families.2520.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Garrod investigated several of these disorders in detail. In alkaptonuria the patients 
produced urine that contained homogentisic acid. This substa nce oxidized rapidly 
when exposed to air, turning the urine black. In normal i ndividuals, homogentisic acid 
is broken down into simpler substances. With considerable insight Garrod concluded 
that patients sufering from alkaptonuria lacked the enzyme necessary to catalyze 
this breakdown. He speculated that many other inherited dis eases might also relect 
enzyme deiciencies.
From Garrod’s inding, it could be inferred that the informati on encoded within the 
DNA of chromosomes acts to specify particular enzymes. This point was not actually 
established, however, untill 1941, when a series of expe riments by Stanford University 
geneticists George Beadle and Edward Tatum provided deiniti ve evidence on this point. 
Beadle and Tatum deliberately set out to create Mendelian m utations in chromosomes 
and then studied the efect of these mutations on the organisms (Fig 20.20).
Beadle and Tatum exposed Neurospora spores to X-rays, expe cting that DNA in some 
of these spores would experience damage in the regions en coding the ability to make 
compounds needed for normal growth (Fig 20.20). DNA change s of this kind are called 
mutations and the organisms that have undergone such changes  are called mutants. 
Initially, they allowed the progeny of the irradiated spores  to grow on a deined medium 
containing all of the nutrients necessary for growth, so that a ny growth deicient 
mutants resulting from the irradiation would be kept alive.
To determine whether any of the progeny of the irradiated sp ores had mutations 
causing metabolic deiciencies, Beadle and Tatum placed  subcultures of individual 
fungal cells on a “minimal” medium that contained only su gar, ammonia, salts, a few 
vitamins and water. Cells that had lost the ability to make othe r compounds necessary 
for growth would not survive on such a medium. Using this appr oach, Beadle and 
Tatum succeeded in identifying and isolating many growth deicient mutants.2620.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Next the researchers added various chemicals to the minima l medium in an attempt 
to ind one that would enable a given mutant strain to grow. This  procedure allowed 
them to pinpoint the nature of the biochemical deiciency that s train had. The addition 
of arginine, for example, permitted several mutant strains,  dubbed arg mutants, to 
grow. When their chromosomal positions were located, the arg m utations were found 
to cluster in three areas.
Fig 20.20 Beadle and Tatum’s procedure for isolating nutrition al mutats in Neurospora2720.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
One - gene / one - polypeptide Hypothesis
For each enzyme in the arginine biosynthetic pathway, Bea dle and Tatum were able 
to isolate a mutant strain with a defective form of that enzyme, and the mutation 
was always located at one of a few speciic chromosomal sites . Most importantly, 
they found there was a diferent site for each enzyme. Thu s, each of the mutant they 
examined had a defect in a single enzyme, caused by a mutation at a single site on 
one chromosome. Beadle and Tatum concluded that genes produc e their efects by 
specifying the structure of enzymes and that each gene en codes the structure of one 
enzyme (Fig 20-21). They called this relationship one -  gene / one - enzyme hypothesis. 
Because many enzymes contain multiple protein or polypeptid e subunits, each encoded 
by a separate gene, the hypothesis is today more commonly re ferred to as “one gene 
/ one- polypeptide”.
Fig. 20.21 Evidence for the “one-gone/one-polypeptide” hy pothesis.2820.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Enzymes are responsible for catalyzing the synthesis of a ll the parts of an organism. 
They are also responsible for the assembly of nucleic ac ids, proteins, carbohydrates 
and lipids. Therefore, by encoding the structure of enzym es and other proteins, DNA 
speciies the structure of the organism itself.
How DN A encodes protein structure?
In 1953, an English biochemist Frederick Sanger, desc ribed the complete sequence of 
amino acids of insulin. Sanger’s achievement was signii cant, as it was demonstrated 
for the irst time that proteins consisted of deinable sequence s of amino acids. Soon it 
was revealed that all enzymes and other proteins are string s of amino acids arranged 
in a certain deinite order.
Following Sanger’s pioneering work, Vernon Ingram in 195 6 discovered the molecular 
basis of sickle cell anemia, a protein defect inherited as a Mendelian disorder. By 
analyzing the structure of normal and sickle cell haemogl obin, Ingram, working at 
Cambridge University, showed that sickle cell anemia is c aused by a change from 
glutamic acid to valine at a single position in the protein (F ig 20.22). The alleles of the 
gene encoding hemoglobin difered only in their speciicati on of this one amino acid in 
the hemoglobin amino acid chain.
These experiments and other related ones have inally broug ht us to a clear 
understanding of the unit of heredity. The characteristics of sickle cell anemia and most 
other hereditary traits are deined by changes in protein s tructure brought about by an 
alteration in the sequence of amino acids that make up the p rotein. This sequence in 
turn is dictated by the order of nucleotides in a particular  region of chromosome. For 
example, the critical change leading to sickle cell dis ease is a mutation that replaces a 
single thymine with an adenine at the position that codes for glutamic acid converting 
the position to valine. The sequence of nucleotides that determi nes the amino acid 
sequence of a protein is called a gene.2920.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
CELLS USE RNA TO MAKE PROTEIN
All organisms use the same basic mechanism of reading and expressing genes, which 
is often referred to as central dogma. The genetic informati on resides in DNA, which 
is also the main fountain head. The genetic information lows  down into RNA, which is 
then converted into protein (Fig 20.23).
  
The irst step of central dogma is the transfer of information from DNA to RNA, which 
occurs when an mRNA copy of the gene is produced. The pr ocess is called transcription. 
Transcription is initiated when the enzyme RNA polymerase  binds to a particular binding’ 
site called a prom oter located upstream of the gene. The en zyme then moves along 
the strand into the gene and mRNA is synthesized. At stop si gnal on the other end of 
gene, the enzyme disengages itself from the DNA and rele ases the newly assembled 
RNA chains. This chain is a complementary transcript of the gene from which it was 
copied. 
Fig 20.22 The  necular basic of a hereditary disease , s ickle cell anemia3020.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
         
 The second step of the central dogma is the transfer of inf ormation from RNA to 
proteins, which occurs when the information contained in the mRNA is used to direct 
the synthesis of polypeptides by ribosomes. This process is  called translation, because 
the nucleotide sequence of the mRNA is translated into an am ino acid sequence in the 
polypeptide.
The two steps of central dogma taken together are also means of  gene expression.
Fig. 20.23 The central dogma of gene expression.3120.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Three types of RNA
The class of RNA found in ribosome is called ribosomal RN A (rRNA). During translation, 
rRNA provides the site where polypeptides are assembled. In addition to rRNA, there 
are two other major classes of RNA in the cells : transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger 
RNA (mRNA). Transfer RNA molecules transport the amino ac ids to the ribosomes for 
use in building the polypeptides and also position each am ino acid at the correct place 
on the elongating polypeptide chain (Fig 20.24). Human ce lls contain about 45 diferent 
kinds of tRNA molecules. Messenger RNA are long strands of RNA that are transcribed
from DNA and that travel to the ribosomes to direct precisely whi ch amino acids are 
assembled into polypeptides.
Fig. 20.24 The structure of tRNA
 (a) two-dimensional schematic
 (b) three dimensional structure.3220.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Transcription
This is the process in which an RNA copy of the DNA seque nce encoding the gene is 
produced with the help of an enzyme, RNA polymerase. Onl y one of the two strands 
of DNA are transcribed. This strand is called template str and or the antisense strand. 
Thq opposite strand is called coding strand or the sense str and. The RNA polymerase 
enzymes synthesize RNA from 5’ —» 3’ direction. There is  only one type of RN A 
polymerase in prokaryote which is responsible for the synth esis of all the three types 
of RNAs viz. rRNA, mRNA and tRNA. On the other hand there are three types of RNA 
polymerases in eukaryotes namely RNA polymerase I, whic h synthsize rRNA, RNA 
polymerase II, which synthesizes mRNA and RNA polymera se III which synthesizes 
tRNA.
 Transcription starts at the RNA polymerase binding site ca lled promoter on the DNA 
template strand. In prokaryotes within promoter there are two bi nding sites TTGACA 
also called -35 sequence and TAT A AT sequence also c alled -10 sequence, which have 
ainity for the RNA polymerase. In eukaryotes these sites ar e at -75 and -25 sites, 
respectively
The binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter is the irst step  in gene transcription. 
One of the subunits of RNA polymerase sigma factor, is res ponsible for correct initiation 
of transcription process. Once the transcription has started th e sigma factor is released 
and the remaining part of the enzyme (core enzymes) moves over template; strand 
and completes the transcription of the gene. The DNA strands open up at the place 
where enzyme is attached to the templete strand forming trans cription bubble. The 
transcription bubble moves down the DNA, leaving the growing s trand protruding 
from the bubble (Fig 20.25). The stop sequences at the en d of the gene terminate the 
synthesis of mRNA. The simplest stop signal is a series of GC base pairs followed by a 
series of AT base pairs. The RNA formed in this region forms a GC hairpin (Fig 20.27) 
followed by four or more U ribonucleotides. The hairpin caus es RNA polymerase to 
stop synthesis.3320.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
In bacteria the newly synthesized mRNA is directly rele ased into the pytoplasm, when it 
is converted into polypeptide chain. In eukaryotes however, it has to travel long distance 
from inside the nucleus to ribosomes outside in the cytoplasm.  The eukaryotic mRNA 
is therefore modiied in several ways to aid this journey. A  cap and a tail is added so 
that the molecule may remain stable during long journey to r ibosome. The cap is in the 
form of 7 methyl GTP, which is linked 5’ to 5’ with the irs t nucleotide, whereas tail is in 
the form of poly A tail linked to 3’ end of the RNA. These c aps and tails save the mRNA 
from variety of nucleases and phosphatases.
GENETIC CODEFig. 20.25 Model of a transcription bubble.3420.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab     
Genetic code is a combination of 3 nucleotides, which specif y a particular amino acid. 
There are three nucleotides in .a codon, because a two nuc leotide codon would not 
yield enough combinations to code for the 20 diferent amino ac ids that commonly 
occur in proteins. With four DNA nucleotides (G,C, T and A )  only 42 or 16, diferent pairs 
of nucleotides could be formed. However, these same nucleotid es can be arranged in 
43 or 64 diferent combinations of three, more than enough to cod e for the 20 amino 
acids. The genetic code is a triplet code and the reading  occurs continuously without 
punctuation between the three nucleotide units.
     After Crick’s initial experiments, Marshall Niren berg, Philip Leader and Har Gobind 
Khorana tested all the 64 codons by making artiicial mRNAs  and triplet codons and 
using them to synthesize a protein or aminoacyl-tRNA complexe s in cell free systems. ‘
        The full genetic code was determinal during m id 60s (Table 20.1). Out of 64 codons, 
three codons UAA, UAG and UGA do not code for any amino acid and hence are known 
as nonsense codons. These codons are usually present at the  end of the gene and 
hence are also called stop codons. Every gene starts with in itiation codon AUG, which 
encodes the amino acid methionine.
Table 20.1 The Genetic Code
Second Letter
First letter         U                                              C                                        A                                       G                                             Third letter
U UUU
UUCphenylalanine UCU
UCCSerineUAU
UACTryosine UGU
UGCCysteineU
C
UUA
UUGLeucineUCA
UCGUAA
UAGStop
StopUGA
UGGStop
TryptophanA
G
CCUU
CUCLeucineCCU
CCCProline CAU
CACHistidineCGU
CGCArginineU
C
CUA
CUCCCA
CCGCAA
CAGGlutamineCGA
CGGA
G
A AUU
AUCIsoleucineACU
ACCTreonineAAU
AACAsparagineAGU
AGCSerineU
C
AUA
AUGMethionine;
StartACA
ACGAAA
AAGLysineAGA
AGGArginieA
G
G GUU
GUCValineGCU
GCCAlanineGAU
GACAspartateGGU
GGCGlycineU
C
GUA
GUGGCA
GCGGAA
GAGGlutamateGGA
GGGA
G3520.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
      
The genetic code is universal. It is the same in almost al l the organisms. For example AGA 
speciies arginine in bacteria, in humans and all other  organisms whose genetic code 
has been studied. Because of the universality of codon, the genes can be transferred 
from one organism to another and be successfully transcribe d and translated in their 
new host.
The study of genetic code of mitochondrial DNA however, showed that genetic code is 
not that universal. For example UGA codon is normally a stop codon  but, in mitochondria 
it reads as tryptophan. Likewise AUA was read as methionin e instead of isoleucine 
and AG A and AGG for termination of protein synthesis is instea d of arginine. Thus it 
appearsthatgenetic code is not quite universal.
TRANSLATION
In prokaryotes, translation begins when the initial portion of an mRNA molecule binds 
to rRNA molecule in a ribosome. The mRNA lies on the ribosom e in such a way that 
only one of its codons is exposed at the polypeptide site at any  time.
A tRNA molecule possessing the complementary three nucleotid e sequence or 
anticodon, binds to the exposed codon on the mRNA. As the ribosom e moves along 
the messenger RNA, successive codons on the mRNA are expos ed and the series of 
tRNA m olecules bind one after another to the exposed codons. E ach of these tRNA 
m olecules carries an attached amino acid, w hich is ad ded to the end of the grow ing 
polypeptide chain.
 
Particular tRNA molecules become attached to speciic amino a cids through the action 
of activating enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, one of which exists for each 
of the 20 common amino acids (Fig 20.26).3620.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 20.26 Activating enzymes “read” the genetic code.
    
In prokaryotes, polypeptide synthesis begins with the formati on of initiation complex 
(Fig. 20.27). First a tRNA molecule carrying a chemica lly modiied methionine (called 
N-formyl methionine) binds to the small ribosomal subunit. P roteins called initiation 
factor position the tRNA on the ribosomal surface at the P site ( peptidyl site) where 
peptide bonds will form. Nearby two other sites will form. A  site (for aminoacyl site), 
where successive amino acid bearing tRNAs will bind an d the E site (for exit site) where 
empty tRNAs will exit the ribosome (Fig 20.27). This initi ation complex, guided by 
another initiation factor, binds to AUG on the mRNA.
After the initiation complex has formed, the large ribosome s ubunit binds tRNA molecule 
with the appropriate anticodon appears, proteins called elong ation factors assist in 
binding it to the exposed mRNA codon at the A site. The two ami no acids which now he 
adjacent to each other undergo a chemical reaction, catalyze d by the large ribosomal 
subunit, which releases the initial methionine from its tRN A and attaches it instead by 
a peptide bond to the second amino acid (Fig. 20.28).3720.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 20.27 Formation of the initiation complex.
 The ribosome now moves (translocates) three more nucleotides a long the mRNA 
molecule in the 5’ —> 3’ direction, guided by other elongati on factors. This movement 
translocates the initial tRNA to the E site and ejects it from th e ribosome, repositions the 
growing polypeptide chain (at this point containing two amino a cids) to the P site, and 
exposes the next codon on the mRNA at the A site (Fig 20.28).  When a tRNA molecule 
recognizing that codon appears, it binds to the codon at the A s ite, placing its amino 
acid adjacent to the growing chain. The chain then transfe rs to the new amino acid, 
and the entire process is repeated.
Fig. 20.28 The translocation process.3820.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
 Elongation continues in this fashion until a chain-terminati ng non sense codon is 
exposed (for example UAA in Fig 20.29). Nonsense codons d o not bind to tRNA, but they 
are recognized by release factors, proteins that release th e newly made polypeptide 
from the ribosomes.
Fig. 20.29 Termination of protein synthesis
   MUTATIONS
The cells of eukaryotes contain an enormous amount of DNA. If the DNA in all of the 
cells of an adult human were lined up end to end, it woul d stretch nearly 100 billion 
kilometers - 60 times the distance from Earth to Jupiter.
Changes in the DNA occur either due to mistake in replicati on or damage to the genetic 
message causing mutations. The mutations in somatic cells d o not pass on to ofspring 
and so have little evolutionary consequence than germ line ch anges. The mutation in 
germ line cell is passed to subsequent generations thus p roviding the raw material 
from which natural selection produces evolutionary change.3920.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Mutations can broadly be classiied as (i) chromosomal aber ration and (ii) point 
mutation. Chromosomal aberrations are mega changes which in volve presence of an 
extra chromosome or loss of a chromosome from the diploid number  of chromosomes, 
or changes like deletions, insertions, inversions etc in the  parts of the chromosome, 
Such chromosomal aberrations lead to syndromes like Down’s sy ndrome, Klinefelter’s 
syndrome etc.
Point mutations are mutational changes which afect the messag e itself, producing 
alterations in the sequence of DNA nucleotide (Table 20.2).  If alterations involve only 
one or a few base pairs in the coding sequence they are called point mutations. While 
some point mutations occur due to spontaneous pairing errors that occur during 
DNA replication, others result from damage to the DNA caused b y mutagens, usually 
radiations or chemicals. The latter class of mutations is of particular practical importance 
because modem industrial societies often release many che mical mutagens into the 
environment. Sickle cell anemia and phenylketonuria are well known examples of point 
mutation, both of which have been discussed in previous page . In sickle ceil anemia a 
point mutation leads to the change of amino acid glutamic acid  into valine at position 
6 from N terminal end in hemoglobin P chain. This conseq uently alters the tertiary 
structure of the hemoglobin molecule, reducing its ability to carry oxygen.
 
In phenylketonuria, phenylalanine is not degraded becau se of defective enzyme 
phenylalanine hydroxylase. Phenylalanine consequently accumulates in the cells 
leading to mental retardation, as the brain fails to develop i n infancy. This disorder is 
because of the point mutation.4020.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
EXERCISE
1. Particular tRNA molecules become attached to speciic ami no acids through the 
action of activating enzymes called________________.
2.  _____ _____is the transfer of genetic material from on e cell to another and can alter 
the genetic make up of the recipient cell.
3. In a bacteria, a subunit of RNA polymerase called___ _________ recognizes-10 
sequence in the promoter and binds RNA polymerase there.
4. A typical human chromosome contain about nucleotides in its  DNA.
5. Miescher extracted a white substance from the nuclei of  human cells and ish 
sperm and called this substance_________ .Q.1 Fill in the blanks.
Q.2 Write whether the statement is true or false and w rite the correct statement 
if it is false.
1.  The strand of DNA that is not transcribed is called the coding strand.
2. TA TAAT sequence called - 35 sequence is part of p romoter, where transcription 
actually starts.
3. Rosalind Franklin carried out an x-ray difraction ana lysis of DNA.
4.  The base pairs in DNA helix are planar and stack 34 nm apart as a result of 
hydrophobic interactions.
Q.4 Shor t Questions
1. What are the three major classes of RNA?
2.  What is the function of RNA polymerase in transcription?
3. How did Crick and his colleagues determine how many nucleotides are used to 
specify each amino acid?
4.  What is anticodon?4120.Chromosomes And DNA eLearn.Punjab
Q.5 Extensive Questions
1. H o w  d i d  H e r s h e y  a n d  C h a s e  d e t e r m i n e  w h i c h  c o m p o n e n t s  o f  b a c t e r i a l                                                                
viruses contain the hereditary information? 
2. ‘ What is the three dimensional shape of DNA? How does th ree dimensional shape of 
DNA it with Chargaf s observations on the proportions of purines and pyrimidines 
in DNA? 
3.  How did Meselson and Stahl show that DNA replication is semi  conservative?
4. What is the basis for the requirement that the leading a nd lagging strands be 
replicated by diferent mechanisms?
5.  What hypothesis did Beadle and Tatum test in their exp eriments on Neurospora ?