CHAPTER
15 Homeostasis
Animation 15 : Homeostasis
Source & Credit: Wikispaces215. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
CONCEPTS IN HOMEOSTASIS
  Each organism of a species has assumed, in evolutionary his tory, a speciic set up of internal 
environment at various levels of organization suitable to its surroundi ngs i.e., external environment. 
External environment and its components luctuate continuously, however, th e organism resists 
and manages these changes by making adjustments to keep its own i nternal luctuations within a 
narrow range thus protecting internal environment from the harms of th e external luctuations. 
The protection of internal environment from the harms of luctuations in external environment is 
termed as homeostasis . The homeostasis keeps the internal luctuations in a narrow range with 
various control systems compared to wider external luctuations.
Most susceptible components of internal environment that may be afected by  luctuations in 
external environments are water, solutes and temperature. Also the mechani sm an organism 
has adapted to eliminate harmful nitrogenous wastes depends upon the availability of water. The 
mechanism of regulation, generally between organism and its environ ment, of solute and the 
gain and loss of water is osmoregulation . The mechanism which eliminates  nitrogenous waste is 
referred as excretion , whereas  maintenance of internal temperature within a tolerable ran ge is 
designated as  thermoregulation .
Likewise the control systems among intracellular and extracellular  internal environment of an 
organism also at cell level keep luctuating in narrow range in i ntracellular, within cell membrane, 
compared to in extracellular (vascular and other interstitial luid s) environment. Here, in addition 
to solute and water various essential metabolites, hormones etc. are kept in  a required range.
Homeostasis does not mean to keep a ixed internal environment as changes maintained within 
a speciic range are necessary for normal body functions. For ex ample, water availability may 
luctuate tremendously for the organisms in the external environment from abundant supply 
to almost dry conditions, however, the quantity of water in the body i.e.  internal environment 
may vary in response to abundant supply and dry condition, bu t in a narrow range. The control 
systems would not let the body looded with water in abundant supply and also not to dehydrate 
in dry conditions. Furthermore, adaptation to lower level of range in dry conditions and to higher 
level of range in abundant supply of water is good for the organis m to feel normal within internal 
luctuations forced by drastic external luctuations.Homeostasis is the central requirement in the maintenance of an organi sm, which compels the 
adaptations in the constant changing conditions and contribute in evolutionary process.315. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
The control systems have been acquired for the variety of homeostatic regul ations. These living 
control systems work exactly on the mechanism of physical control s ystem. It has three components: 
receptor, control centre and an efector. In a physical control system e.g. temperature control 
system, there is a sensor (thermometer) that monitors temperature change fr om a set point and 
signals to control centre to take action by switching on heater or coolin g units in response to drop 
or rise in the temperature compared to set point. Similar to it in livi ng system there is set point in 
temperature regulated (endothermic) animals. The receptors (sensor) detec t temperature change, 
e.g. of increase and signal to control centre for action of cooling s ystems and the vice versa. Detection 
of change and signalling for efector’s response to control system is  a feedback mechanism. In 
these processes there is an inverse efector’s response to the change in extern al environment as 
there is generally cooling efector’s response to warmth sensing in exter nal environment, thus are 
termed as negative feedback (Fig. 15.1).
Animation 15.1 : Homeostasis
Source & Credit: Dynamic Science415. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
  
 
OSMOREGULATION
Water relations of cell
Water is the solvent of the solutes in the cell. Each cell has been ada pted to a deined quantity of 
water in relation to salts in it to perform its functions. Homeostatic m echanisms generally maintain 
this concentration.
Balance of water and solutes in the body
Cells consistently encounter changing extracellular environment. It m ay be of diluted solution 
compared to the cell concentration, thus designated as hypotonic  environment. The more 
concentrated external environment is termed as hypertonic  and that resembles to internal 
solution is the isotonic .
The hypotonic environment osmotically causes entry of water into the cell and renders the cell 
solutions diluted. The cellFig.15.1. Homeostasis: Controlling systems lower luctuations i n internal environments515. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
also becomes turgid. Thus it may be harmed (Fig. 15.2a). Th e hypertonic environment, on the 
other hand; renders cell solutions concentrated and shrinks the cell  due to loss of water (Fig. 
15.2c). To prevent these situations cells osmoregulate themselves to keep water  and salts balance 
in plants and animals.
Osmoregulation in Plants
Plants are distributed in diferent habitats of aquatic, moderate an d severely dry terrestrial nature, 
thus termed as hydrophytes, mesophytes and xerophytes, respectively. Fig. 15.2 Response of the cell to various external environment s i.e. diferent concentrations of
solution without any regulation with control system at cell membrane, cell remains in
normal state despite .diferences in its internal to extern al environments.
Animation 15.2: Osmoregulation
Source and Credit: Andrew Biology615. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Hydrophytes  have the adaptations to remove the looding of its cells in fresh water. In  this type the 
surface area of leaves is very large to transpire water excessively. E xtensive stomata are present on 
the upper surface facing the atmosphere to promote loss of water (Fig. 15.3a). 
Mesophytes  have moderate water availability. In suicient supply of water stomata  are kept open 
to promote loss of excess water, however, in restricted supply stomata clos e to prevent the loss 
e.g. Brassica, rose, mango etc.
Xerophytes  have the adaptations for reduced rate of transpiration. Many xerophy tes possess 
small, thick leaves to limit water loss by reducing surface area  proportional to the volume. Their 
cuticle is thick, waxy and leathery. Stomata are on lower surfac e of leaves and located in depression. 
Some as cacti, during the driest season, shed their leaves to restr ict transpiration completely, thus 
stems are the photosynthetic organs. In rainy season, stem stores water for use in dry conditions 
(Fig. 15.3b).
Animation 15.3: Osmoregulation in plants
Source and Credit: Ameoba Sisters715. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 15.3a. A hydrophytic plant Fig.15.3b. A xerophytic plant
Osmoregulation in Animals
Animal cells require more critical balance of water and solutes in the body as they cannot survive 
a net water gain or loss. Water continuously leaves and enters the cell s; however, the quantity of 
the water and the solutes is kept in balance. There are two approaches  in maintaining this balance.
1. Animal body luids are kept isotonic to the external environment even f or marine saltwater 
environment. These animals thus do not require actively to adjust their internal osmotic state, so 
are known as osmoconformers .
2.    The   animals  whose body luid concentrations difer notic eably the outside environment 
actively regulate to discharge excess water in hypotonic and excrete sa lts in hypertonic  
conditions therefore, are called as osmoregulators . Animals inhabiting diferent environments 
have distinct adaptations to regulate osmotic balance, e.g. marine, f resh water and terrestrial 
environments.815. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Osmoregulation in Diferent Environments
Marine:  Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers. Among the vertebrates hagishes  are 
isotonic with the surrounding sea’s water. Most cartilaginous ish es maintain lower, internal   salt 
concentration than that of seawater. Their kidneys for osmoregulation ex crete salts through 
gills and also possess salt excreting organs such as rectal g lands. These employ active transport 
mechanism to remove salt against osmotic gradient. Some ishes have rela tively low salts in body 
luids but have rendered these hypertonic to that of seawater by retaining  urea in adequate 
concentration. Because urea in high concentration is damaging so these ishes retain another 
chemical trimethylamine oxide(TMAO) for protection against urea. B ony ishes, the descendents 
of fresh water ancestors but later became marine constantly lose water from their hypotonic body 
luids to hypertonic environments. These ishes have adapted themselves to dr ink large amount 
of seas water and excrete concentrated urine resulting in maximum s alt excretion and minimum 
water loss (Fig. 15.4a).
Osmoregulation has enabled the animals and plants to distribute th emselves in wide range of 
habitats.
Fig.15.4. Osmoregulation in: (a) Marine ish (b) Fresh wate r ish915. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Fresh Water:  Fresh water animals are constantly facing the osmotic looding of b ody luids and 
loss of salts. Fresh water protozoa, Amoeba and Paramecium pump out excess water by structures 
contractile vacuoles . Many fresh water animals including ishes remove excess water by producing 
large volumes of very dilute urine. The loss of salts is compens ated by preference of salt containing 
food and by active uptake of salts by gills and skin (Fig. 1 5.4b).
Terrestrial:  The evaporative loss of water leading to dehydration is the major probl em for terrestrial 
life. Arthropods and vertebrates have successfully adapted to terrestria l mode of life. Terrestrial 
animals are covered by body surface, which prevents loss of water as the waxy exoskeletons of 
insects and multi-layered dead, keratinized skin cells of most terrestrial vertebrates. Drinking and 
eating moist foods compensate the loss of water. These animals also ha ve metabolic and behavioral 
adaptations. Some desert mammals e.g. kangaroo rat survives without d rinking water by feeding 
on seeds of desert plants containing more carbohydrates, which prod uce water of metabolism. 
Terrestrial animals produce concentrate urine in their kidneys tha t reabsorb most iltered water 
in the process of excretion. Terrestrial animals can tolerate dehydra tion and it difers in various 
animals. This characteristic is known as anhydrobiosis .
EXCRETION
Among the assimilated nutrients in animals, carbohydrates and lipids are metabolized to CO2 
and H20. Proteins and nucleoproteins metabolism produces waste nitrogen in various forms in 
diferent animals. The waste nitrogen proves toxic if it is concentrated  in the cell, therefore, it must 
be removed from the body. The elimination of wasteful metabolites, mainl y of the nitrogenous 
nature is called excretion. 
In contrast, the mechanism of excretion in plants is diferent. Pla nts in their autotrophic mode of 
life produce oxygen and in metabolism produce C02 and H20 as the excretory products. Plants also 
produce several organic and inorganic compounds which are stored  for various purposes and are 
also removed when necessary.
Plant cells have large vacuoles; these can be used for either storage of  useful compounds, or the 
storage of waste substances. These may accumulate at the concentrations  that lead to crystal 
formation in the vacuoles. Plants produce certain wastes of inorgani c and organic nature, which 
are stored in certain organs.1015. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
The leaves are the prominent organs for this purpose. These leaves are d estined to fall of, as is the 
case of autumn leaves in plants or die of as happens in the leaves and stalk of certain bulbs e.g. 
bluebell, leaving the bulb underground. This is the reason gard ener ind rotted autumn leaves a 
good source of minerals. The falling of yellow leaves in autumn i s th
seasonal time for the plants to get rid of the accumulated wastes and because of the reason leaves 
are said to be excretophore . According to an explanation the change in color in these leaves is  not 
due to removal of chlorophyll as the microscopic examination of autum n leaves shows that leaves 
are loaded with pigmented compounds prior to falling of and many  toxic materials like heavy 
metals increase sharply as the yellowing proceeds.
Some trees deposit strange chemicals in their branches and trunks,  especially in old xylem which is 
no longer used for water transport. This takes place in ebony which produces very black wood in 
the center.These are considered to be, waste materials by plant physiol ogists.
Some plants will actively secrete waste compounds into the soil, occasi onally using them as chemical 
weapons against other competing plants e.g conifers.
Animation 15.4: Osmoregulation in plants
Source and Credit: Living BIo.net1115. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Keeping in view the deinition of excretion, as discussed earlier, tha t it is the elimination of waste 
metabolites several products may be included in the list of excretory products. Water due to its removal 
in hypo osmotic environment is labelled as an excretory product in th ese speciic conditions.Similarly, 
salts removed by animals in  hypertonic environment are the excretory products for these animals. 
 Otherwise, overwhelmingly, nitrogenous waste metabolites constitute the excr etory products.
Primarily, in the catabolism of animo acids the amino group ( ---NH2) is released (deamination)  
or transferred to another molecule for removal or reuse. Amino group not r eused for recycling of 
amino acids is essentially dissolved in water and excreted to avoid toxic rise in the plasma. Elevated 
levels of these wastes can cause convulsions, coma and eventually death . Mostly excess nitrogen 
is excreted by animals as ammonia, urea or uric acid  (Fig. 15.5). Lower quantities of nitrogen are 
excreted in the form of other compounds such as creatinine,  creatine  or trimethylamine oxide  
and in very small quantities as amino acids, purines and p yrimidines. Metabolism of purine and 
pyrimidine bases produces signiicant amount of nitrogenous wastes  of hypoxanthine , xanthine ,
uric acid , allantoin , urea  and ammonia .1215. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Nature of Excretory Products in Relation to Habitats
Ammonia is  very  toxic and dissolves quickly  in body luids . Thus, it must be kept in low concentration 
in the body. To maintain its low concentration  below that of body req uires large volume of water 
also to eliminate it in urine as it is produced. This is possi ble in an hypotonic environment. Therefore, 
ammonia kept as the excretory product of the animals inhabiting hy potonic (e.g. fresh water) 
environment. About 500 ml water is needed to excrete lg of ammonia nitrog en.
Fig 15.6: Metabolic pathways in urea cycle1315. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
In restricted supply of water, ammonia cannot be kept as excretory p roduct, the other alternative 
is to change it into less toxic substance such as urea. Urea requi res only 50 ml of water for its lg 
of nitrogen removal. Here excretory nitrogen is metabolically converted into urea by urea cycle 
(Fig. 15.6) in the animals inhabiting environment with restric ted supply of water e.g. terrestrial 
mammals.
Aimals inhabiting environment with acute shortage of water supply require an excretory product 
which can be excreted with minimum amount of water. Only 1ml w ater is required to eliminate lg 
of nitrogen in the form of uric acid. Therefore the reptiles and birds that inhabit arid environment, 
excrete uric acid as excretory product. Animals excreting ammonia , urea .and uric acid are called 
as ammonotelic, ureotelic  and uricotelic  respectively. Ureotely and uricotely are evolutionary 
adaptations of nitrogenous waste in their habitats. Animals have ad apted not only the chemical 
nature of excretory products but also the various adaptations have been obtained to provide 
diversity in excretory structures. The main representative models are des cribed below:
EXCRETION IN REPRESENTATIVE ANIMALS
Excretion in Hydra
Hydra, a cnidarian, does not have specialized excretory structures . In it waste products simply 
difuse into the isosmotic surroundings.
Excretion in Planaria
Planaria the animals of the group of latworms have simple tubula r excretory system called 
protonephridium . A protonephridium is a network of closed tubules without internal openings. 
Tubular system is spread throughout the body and branches are capped by a cellular setup termed 
as lame cell . Each lame cell has a tuft of cilia, whose beating propels in terstitial luid into the 
tubular system (The beating of cilia looks like a lickering la me, therefore these cells are termed 
lame cells). The tubular system is drained into excretory ducts, which open to the exterior through 
several nephridiopores (Fig. 15.7).
Fresh water latworms excrete very dilute urine. The parasitic latworm s, which are isotonic to the 
host environment mainly function in disposing nitrogenous wastes.1415. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
 
Excretion in Earthworm
Earthworm is an ideal example of another type of tubular excretory s ystem called as metanephridium.  
Each segment of earthworm has a pair of metanephridia. This sy stem has an internal ciliated 
opening the nephrostome  immersed in coelomic luid and enveloped by a network of capillar ies. 
Nephrostome collects coelomic luid. As luid moves along the tubule, epi thelium reabsorbs salt 
from the lumen and sends to blood vessels surrounding the nephrid ium. The left over appears as 
urine containing nitrogenous waste (Fig. 15.8). Fig.15.7. Excretory system in Planaria1515. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Excretion in Cockroach
Terrestrial arthropods particularly in the insects, the excretory s tructures are adapted to collect 
excretory products from hemolymph in sinuses through suspended tub ular structures called 
Malpighian tubules . These Malpighian tubules remove nitrogenous waste from the hemolymph . 
These are the only excretory structures in animal kingdom that are a ssociated with digestive tract. 
The epithelial lining of the tubules transports solutes including salts and nitrogenous waste from 
haemolymph into tubules lumen. Fluid then passes to hind gut into the rectum. Rectum reabsorbs 
most of the salts and water, thus nitrogenous wastes are excreted as sol id excreta, in the form of 
uric acid crystals along the feces. ig: 15.8 : Excretory system in earthworm1615. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
This kind of adaptation in excretion is the success of these anima ls on land with acute shortage of 
water (Fig. 15.9)
EXCRETION IN VERTEBRATES
The ancestors of vertebrates, the invertebrate chordates have segmentally arra nged excretory 
structures throughout the body like the metanephridia in earthworm. T his character is well 
represented in the primitive vertebrate hagishes which have kidneys with  segmentally arranged 
tubules. However, the contrasting developments proceeded in evolution in other ver tebrates 
with the appearance of kidneys. Kidneys contain numerous tubules,  not arranged segmentally, 
closely associated with dense network of capillaries. The basic f unctional structure in the kidneys 
is nephron .
Excretion in Human
Normal Mechanisms : Considering the chemical basis of life and its sustainabil ity on metabolic 
pathways, the generation of wastes is primarily done at metabolic l evel and these are called 
metabolic wastes .Insects are the only group of animals, which eliminate excretory w aste with feces, in all other 
animals, there is no structural and functional relationship b etween nutritive and excretory system.Fig. 15.9 Excretory system in insect1715. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
 These include urea, produced from the metabolism of amino acids ; creatinine, produced from 
muscle creatine; uric acid, from nucleic acids; bilirubin , end products of haemoglobin breakdown 
and metabolites of various hormones. 
Metabolic wastes also include the toxins produced within the body an d ingested into the body such 
as pesticides, drugs and food additives. The presence of wastes in  the body causes serious hazards, 
thus are eliminated by excretory system.
Excretory Organs:
Liver and kidneys are the primary structure for eliminating was te products.
Liver  is the central station of metabolism and consequently the body’s centr al metabolic clearing 
house. Due to this characteristic, liver functions are pivotal to homeosta sis and involve interaction 
with most of body’s organs systems. Liver supports the excretory role of  the kidney by detoxifying 
many chemical poisons and produce ammonia, urea and uric a cids from the nitrogen of amino 
acids. Removal of salts with water by the sweat glands and of seb um by sebaceous glands seems 
to be excretory in nature. The removal of water and salts from sweat gl ands is for the purpose of 
thermoregulation and of sebum on the skin is for protection against microorganism. Therefore 
in context of deinition of excretion, skin may not be considered as an  excretory organ. Among 
the various nitrogenous wastes described earlier, urea is the princi pal excretory product and liver 
form it from the waste nitrogen. The metabolic pathways involved in the production of urea are 
termed as urea cycle . Two ammonia and one carbon dioxide molecules are shunted into the 
cycle to generate one molecule of urea. One ammonia molecule combines wi th carbon dioxide 
and already available precursor from previous cycle ornithine  to form citrulline , subsequently 
another ammonia combines to form arginine . The arginine is split by arginase  to form urea and 
the precursor ornithine for next cycle (Fig. 15.6).1815. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
  Table 15.1. Major homeostatic functions of the liver
Functions Major efects on homeostasis
Synthesis:  Nitrogenous wastes:  NH3, urea, uric 
acidSupports kidney in waste disposal
Plasma proteins: like a) prothrombin, ibrinogen
b) albumin etc.a) Blood clotting b) maintain osmotic balance of 
blood
Bile Emulsiies fats in small intestine
Lipids, cholesterol, lipoproteins Regulate blood chemistry, store energy and help 
to maintain cell membranes
Storage:  Iron Oxygenation of tissues as constituent of 
haemoglobin
Glycogen Energy reserves
Conversion:  Excess glucose in blood to glycogen,
lactic, acid to glycogen and stored glycogen to 
glucoseEnergy storage and use
Recyclings:  Contents of old red blood cells (e.g., 
iron and other constitution of haemoglobin)Oxygenation of tissue
Detoxiication:  Many harmful chemicals (e.g., 
food additives, pesticides, drugs etc)Assist kidney in toxin disposal
Liver is not only involved in the synthesis of nitrogenous wastes to assi st kidney in their disposal, 
but also has numerous crucial functions of homeostasis importanc e. These functions belong to 
synthesis, storage, conversion, recycling and detoxiication categories  (Table 15.1).
Urea is detoxiied form of ammonia in urea cycle, which can be r etained in the body in greater 
amounts than ammonia and can be eliminated with 1/10 quantity of water as compared to 
ammonia.1915. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Urinary System
A pair of kidneys consists of millions of functional units, n ephrons. The nephrons have extensive 
blood supply via the renal arteries, which leave each kidney via th e renal vein. The function of 
kidney and blood in clearing wastes is very evident from the fact th at weight of kidneys accounts for 
less than 1% of the total body weight while receive 20% of blood suppl ied with each cardiac beat. 
Following iltration of blood and further processing through tubula r system urine is collected in a 
central cavity of the kidney, pelvis.  Urine leaves the kidney through a duct ureter . The ureters of 
both the kidneys drain into urinary bladder  through ureteral oriice. Urine leaves the body, during 
urination, from the bladder through a tube called the urethra , which empties near the vagina in 
females or through the penis in males. Sphincter muscles near the junction of the urethra and the 
bladder control the urine in bladder (Fig. 15.10).
Animation 15.4: Urinary System
Source and Credit: Renal Pathology2015. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Nephron:  The functional units, nephrons, in human kidneys are arran ged along two distinct regions, 
an outer cortex  and an inner medulla . The nephrons arranged along the cortex are called as 
cortical , however, those arranged along the border of cortex and medulla with their tubular system 
looping deep in inner medulla are juxtamedullary  nephrons These juxtamedullary nephrons are 
speciically instrumental in the production of concentrated urine (F ig. 15.11).Fig. 15.10. Human urinary system2115. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
In each nephron inner end forms a cup-shaped swelling, call ed Bowman’s capsule  and it is 
around a ball of capillaries called glomerulus . Glomerulus circulates blood through capsule as it 
arrives through aferent arteriole  and leaves the capsule by eferent arteriole . The blood vessel 
subdivides again into another network of capillaries, the peritubular capillaries . Bowman capsule 
continues as extensively convoluted proximal tubule , loop of Henle  and the distal tubule , which 
empties into collecting tubules. The collecting tubules  open into pelvis. The iltrate from glomerulus 
passes through these structures and is processed ultimately for ur ine formation. The peritubular 
capillaries intermingle with proximal and distal tubules of th e nephron. In juxtamedullary nephrons 
additional capillaries extend down to from a loop of vessels, vasa recta .
Fig. 15.11. The structure of a kidney2215. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Filtration:  Blood passing through glomerulus is iltered into Bowman’s caps ule. It is speciically 
iltered here, unlike at the other parts of the vessels, because glomerulu s walls are porous, and 
the fraction of the blood pressure reaching here provides the iltration pressure . The iltrate 
appearing in Bowmans capsule is called as glomerular iltrate , which contains numerous useful 
substances such as glucose, amino acids, salts etc in aqueous  solution.
Reabsorption : All the useful constituents of the glomerular ilterate are reabsorbed in  proximal 
tubules and when iltrate leaves proximal tubules, it mostly contains  nitrogenous wastes.
Secretion : The tubular epithelium also secretes substances into the lumen, this  secretion is very 
selective and is mainly of hydrogen ions to balance pH value of the iltrate passing through the 
tubule.
Concentration of Excretory Products
In restricted supply of water, the conservation of water is the princ ipal function of the body. This is 
done by concentration of the iltrate by counter current and hormonal mec hanisms. In the suicient 
or excess supply of water, reabsorption of water from the iltrate is r educed, speciically due to 
inhibition of release of antidiuretic hormone in the presence of hyposom otic body luids. 
The reduction in reabsorption causes large volumes of diluted urine.  Mammalian kidney including 
human is adapted to conserve water by over 99.5% reabsorption of glomer ular iltrate.2315. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Fig:15.12. a nephron with vascular supply2415. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
The interstitial luid of the kidney is gradually concentrated from  cortical to medullary part, thus inner 
medulla is highly concentrated with the presence of urea and throug h a mechanism of counter-
current multiplier . This mechanism causes gradual osmotic outlow of water from the iltrate 
back to kidney as it passes downward in the descending loop of H enle. Furthermore, ascending 
loop of Henle does not allow outlow of water from its iltrate, instead acti vely transport Na ions 
into kidney interstitium to sustain its high concentration.
Hormones:  The active uptake of sodium in the ascending limb or thick loop of Henle is promoted 
by the action of aldosterone , the hormone secreted from adrenal cortex . The other site in the 
nephron, where reabsorption of water takes place is collecting tubules . ADH  released from posterior 
pituitary lobe  acts to actively transport water from iltrate in  Distal tubules and collecting tubules 
back to kidney.
Kidney as Osmoregulatory Organ
The production of varied concentrations of urine depending on the avail ability of water exhibits 
clearly that kidney functions as an osmoregulatory organ along its excretory role of nitrogenous 
wastes.Gradually increasing osmotic concentration from cortex to inner medul la is a main factor for the 
production of hypertonic (concentrated) urine in mammals includi ng human.
Animation 15.5: Kidney As Osmoregulatory Organ
Source and Credit: Blobs2515. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Kidney Problems and Cures 
Unusual situations may arise in the function of kidney by factor s originating within kidney or 
outside. These cause serious kidney diseases.
Kidney Stones:  Stony materials are found in the kidney and these cause urinary  obstruction and 
are generally complicated by infections. These stones have speciied c hemical nature. These are 
formed in metabolic disease, hypercalcemia  i.e. high level of circulating calcium in blood because 
of other diseases. Hyperoxaluria  i.e. higher blood level of oxalates is other contributing factor in 
the formation of calcium oxalate stones. Oxalates are present in green vegetables and tomatoes 
therefore may be the source of hyperoxaluria. The incidence of calc ium oxalate type stones are 
70% of all the kidney stones. The incidence of other types of stones of calcium phosphate and of 
uric acid is 15% and 10% respectively. These salts are precip itated out during urine formation and 
accumulate later to form stone (Fig. 15.13).
Animation 15.6: Kidney Problems2615. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 15.13. The kidney stones: Stone of phosphates are formed  and trapped in the pelvis area2715. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Lithotripsy: The kidney stones have been removed by kidney surgery. Presently l ithotripsy is used 
for non-surgical removal of kidney stone. It is the technique used to break up stones that form in 
the kidney, ureter or gall bladder. There are several ways to do it, although the most common is 
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. High concentrations of X-ray or ultrasound are directed from 
a machine outside the body to the stone inside. The shock waves break the stone in tiny pieces or 
into sand, which are passed out of the body in urine.
Renal Failure:  Various factors of pathological and chemical nature may progre ssively destroy the 
nephron, particularly its glomerular part. This results in increase in the plasma level of urea and 
other nitrogenous wastes. The rise in urea causes complications of i ncrease in blood pressure and 
anemia etc.
Dialysis :  In chronic renal failure, the function of the kidney is completely  lost and is unable to 
remove nitrogenous waste. To remove nitrogenous waste, particularly the urea , the blood of the 
patient is treated through dialysis. It cleans the blood either by pa ssing it through an artiicial 
kidney or by iltering it within the abdomen. The wastes and excess  water are removed during the 
treatment as is done by the healthy kidneys.
There are two types of dialysis: hemodialysis  and peritoneal dialysis.
Hemodialysis means ‘cleaning the blood’. In this procedure blood is circulated through a machine 
which contains a dialyzer  also called an artiicial kidney. Dialyzer has two spaces sep arated by 
thin membrane. Blood passes from one side of the membrane and dial ysis luid on the other. The 
wastes and excess water pass from the blood through the membrane into the dialysis luid.
   Peritoneal dialysis work on the same principle except that abdom en has a peritoneal cavity , lined 
by a thin epithelium called  peritoneum . Peritoneal cavity is illed with dialysis luid that enters the 
body through a catheter. Excess water and wastes pass through the p eritoneum into the dialysis 
luid. This process is repeated several times a day. Dialyzer is a kidney machine that works on the 
same principle as in a kidney for removal of nitrogenous wastes a nd excess water from the blood. 
It is used after kidney failure and dialysis is done again   and again until a matching donor’s kidney 
is transplanted.
Kidney Transplant:  Dialysis may be used as a temporary measure. In high degree r enal failure also 
called as uremia  or end-stage renal disease , the dialysis can not be done hence thus the surgical 
transplantation of a matching donor kidney is the only option left f or as the permanent treatment.2815. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
THERMOREGULATION
Control systems operate in organisms to cope with environmental stresses i ncluding temperature 
extremes.
Adaptations in Plants to Low and High Temperature
High Temperature :  High temperature denatures the enzymes and damages the metabolism, 
therefore, it harms or kills the plants. Plants use evaporative cooling  to manage with high 
temperature. Hot and dry weather, however, causes water deiciency resul ting in closing of stomata, 
thus plants sufer in such conditions. Most plants have adapted to survive in heat stress as the 
plants of temperate regions face the stress of 40°C and above temperature.  The cells of these 
plants synthesize large quantities of special proteins called heat-shock proteins . These proteins 
embrace enzymes and other proteins thus help to prevent denaturation.
Low Temperature : In low temperature the luidity of the cell membrane is altered, becau se lipids 
of the membrane become locked into crystalline structures, which afec ts the transport of the 
solutes. The structure of the membrane proteins is also afected. Plants  respond to cold stress by 
increasing proportion of unsaturated fatty acids, which help mem brane to maintain structure at 
low temperature by preventing crystal formation. This adaptation requ ires time because of this 
reason rapid chilling of plants is more stressful than gra dual drop in air temperature.
Freezing temperature causes ice crystal formation. The coninement of i ce formation around cell 
wall does not afect as badly and plants survive, however, formation of ice crystals within protoplasm 
perforates membranes and organelles hence killing the cells. The plants native to cold region such 
as oaks, maples, roses and other plants have adapted to bring c hanges in solutes composition of 
the cells, which causes cytosol to super cool without ice formation, a lthough ice crystals may form 
in the cell walls.
MECHANISMS IN ANIMALS
Body Heat, Heat Gain and Loss
Temperature of an animal depends upon the rate of change of body hea t which in turn depends 
on rate of heat production through metabolic processes and the rate of external heat  gain and 
rate of heat loss. This transfer of heat between an animal and its environment is done in numerous 
ways. Principally, infrared thermal radiation and direct a nd relected sunlight transfer heat into the 
animal; whereas radiation and evaporation transfer heat out to the envir onment.2915. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Temperature Classiication of Animals
Animals deal with variation in the thermal characteristics of thei r environment. There are animals 
in which body temperature tends to luctuate more or less with ambient tem perature where air or 
water temperatures are changed, these are poikilotherms , all invertebrates, ish, amphibians and 
reptiles are considered in this category. The other exposed to changing  air or water temperature 
maintain their body temperature are the homeotherms  and include birds and mammals. Several 
diiculties arise with this terminology with studies. It is observed that deep sea ishes maintain 
their body temperature due to the constant natural surroundings an d lizards regulate their body
temperature; and in contrast numerous birds and mammals vary their body temperature.
 Therefore, a more widely applicable temperature classiication sch eme is based on the source of heat 
production. According to this animals that generate their own body h eat through heat production 
as by-product during metabolism are endotherms  include lying insects, some ishes, birds and 
mammals. Ectotherm  is the other type, which produce metabolic heat at low level and that i s also 
exchanged quickly with the environment, however, absorb heat from their  surroundings. Most 
invertebrates, ish, amphibians and reptiles are in this category.  A third category, heterotherms  is 
of those animals who are capable of varying degrees of endothermic h eat production but generally 
do not regulate their body temperature within a narrow range e.g. bats , humming bird etc.
Regulation of Heat Exchange between Animals and Envi ronment 
Animals use diferent mechanism for such regulation and these ar e of structural, physiological and 
behavioral nature.
Structural Adaptations:  These may be long term changes in sub dermal fatty layer insu lation and 
pelage . The presence of sweat glands  and lungs modiied for panting .
Behavioral Adaptations:  These include moving of the animal to an environment where heat 
exchange between these is minimal e.g. ground squirrels move to burr ows in midday heat and 
lizards bask in sun to gain heat. Animals also control the am ount of surface area available for heat 
exchange by adjusting their postures.3015. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
THERMOREGULATION IN MAMMALS (HUMAN)
Regulatory Strategies
Mammals including human maintain their high body temperatur e within a narrow range of about 
36-38 °C because of their endothermic characteristics. The origin  of endothermy in birds and 
mammals have provided the opportunity to keep high metabolic rate and  availability of energy 
round the clock, thus has acquired greater ability to adaptations and has assisted in much of their 
wider diversity and distribution in diversiied regions of the earth.
These regulate the rate of metabolic heat production, balancing it with  the rate at which they 
gain or lose heat from the surroundings. The rate of heat production  is increased by increased 
muscle contraction by movements or shivering so called as shivering thermogenesis . Also 
hormones trigger the heat production as do thyroid hormones and are term ed as non-shivering  
thermogenesis. Some mammals possess brown fat, which is special ized for rapid heat production. 
In overproduction of heat it is dissipated through exposed surfaces b y increasing blood low or 
the evaporative cooling. In mammals, it is observed that skin has been  adapted as the organ of 
thermoregulation. (Fig. 15.14)
In  Cold  Temperature : Mammals  have  various  mechanisms  that  regulate heat  exchang e with 
their environment. Vasodilation and vasoconstriction efect heat exchange a nd may contribute to 
regional temperature diferences with in an animal. On a cool day  a human’s temperature may 
be several degrees lower in the arms and legs than in the trunk, wh ere the most vital glands are 
situated. Most land mammals respond to cold by raising their f urs thereby trapping the thicker 
layer of still air and it acts as good insulator between animal skin and the surroundings. Human 
mostly rely on a layer of fat just insulating beneath the skin as insulating material against heat loss. 
Similarly marine mammals such as whales and seals inha bit much colder water than their body 
temperature, have a very thick layer of insulating fat called as  blubber just under the skin.3115. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Fig. 15.14 The thermostat function of the hypothalamus and feed back control mechanisms in human 
thermoregulation.3215. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
In Warm Temperature :  Marine mammals dispose of their excess heat into warm seas by l arge 
number of blood vessels in the outer layer of the skin. This diss ipates the heat from the skin 
surface. In terrestrial mammals, in contrast is the mechanism of evaporative cooling. The sweat 
gland activity and the evaporative cooling is the one of the major tempera ture reducing strategies. 
Panting, the evaporative cooling in the respiratory tract, is’the other mec hanism as represented in 
the dogs. Bats etc use saliva and urine for evaporative cooling.
Thermostat Function and Feedback Controls in Human
The body temperature regulation in humans is based on complex homeos tatic systems facilitated 
by feedback mechanisms. The homeostatic thermostat is present in th e hypothalamus, a brain 
part. It responds to the changes in the temperature above and below a set point which is 37°C. 
In case of increase in temperature above the set point, certain warm temp erature sensitive 
thermoreceptors in skin, hypothalamus and other parts of nervous sy stems send the signals to the 
system that increase the blood low to the skin and also cause sweat gl and activation and the sweat 
is evaporated for the cooling. 
In cold temperature, the cold receptors send the impulses to hypothalamu s to inhibit heat loss 
mechanisms and activate the heat conservation mechanisms. This inc ludes constriction of supericial 
blood vessels and stimulating shivering and non shivering mechan isms.
Temperature in fever (Pyrexia)
 In bacterial and viral infections mainly, leukocytes increase i n number. These pathogens and
 the blood cells produce chemicals called as pyrogens. Pyrogens  displace the set point of
 hypothalamus above the normal point of 37° C. Fever or high temperatur e helps in stimulating
.the protective mechanisms against the pathogens3315. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
  Exercise
   
                                                                  
  Q.2. Fill in the blank.
(i)    ___________________is the ability of an organism to regulate its luid contents.
(ii)   The detoxiication of ammonia to ________________ requir es the precursor of
       ornithine.
(iii)  In kidney nephron is closely associated with network of__ ____________________ .
(iv)  In insects salt and water reabsorption takes places in the__ _________________.
(v)   The antidiuretic hormone act on_________________ to promote r eabsorption of water
        in vertebrate nephron.
(vi)  The nephrons arranged along the border of cortex and medulla , with tubular system looping    
       deep in the inner medulla, are called ______________ ____ .
       nephrons.
(vii) The non surgical procedure of removing kidney stone is termed as______________ .
(viii) ___________ is the homeostatic thermostat in human.
Q.3. Short questions
(i)     Diferentiate between osmoconformers and osmoregulators.
(ii)    Deine anhydrobiosis with an example.
(iii)   Why does iltration takes place only at glomeruli part of nephron and nowhere else?
(vi)   Mention two metabolic altered states that generally (70%) cause kidney stone formation.
(v)    What is a renal failure?
(vi)   Account one each main adaptation in plants to high and l ow temperatures.3415. Homeostasis eLearn.Punjab
Q.4. Extensive questions
(i)      Discuss nature of excretory products in animal to variou s habitats, speciically in association          
          of water availability.
(ii)     Account the excretory system in earthworm.
(iii)    Highlight the role of liver as an excretory organ.
(vi)    Draw a labeled diagram of a vertebrate nephron with all b lood supply. State the function of   
          each part.
(v)      Describe thermoregulatory strategies in mammals includin g human in cold temperature.
(vi)     Discuss excretion in plants.
(vii)    Discuss some kidney problems with their cures.