
Chapter 20
ATOMIC SPECTRA
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1.
Know experimental facts of hydrogen spectrum.
2.
Describe Bohr's postulates of hydrogen atom.
3.
Explain hydrogen atom in terms of energy levels.
4.
Describe de-Brogile's interpretation of Bohr's orbits.
5.
Understand excitation and ionization potentials.
6.
Describe uncertainty regarding position of electron in the atom.
7.
Understand the production, properties and uses of X-rays.
8.
Describe the terms spontaneous emission, stimulated emission, metastable states
and population inversion.
9.
Understand laser principle.
10
Describe the He-Ne gas laser.
11.
Describe the application of laser including holography.
T
he branch of physics that deals with the investigation of wavelengths and intensities of
electromagnetic radiation emitted or absorbed by atoms is called spectroscopy. It includes
the study of spectra produced by atoms. In general there are three types of spectra called (i)
continuous spectra, (ii) band spectra, and (iii) discrete or line spectra.
Black body radiation spectrum, as described in chapter 19 is an example of continuous
spectra; molecular spectra are the examples of band spectra while the atomic spectra,
which we shall investigate in detail in this chapter, are examples of discrete or line spectra.
20.1 ATOMIC SPECTRA
When an atomic gas or vapour at much less than atmospheric pressure is suitably excited,
usually by passing an electric current through it, the emitted radiation has a spectrum, which
contains certain specific wavelengths only. An idealized arrangement for observing such
atomic spectra is shown in Fig. 20. 1. Actual spectrometer uses diffraction grating for better
results.
The impression on the screen is in the form of lines if the slit in front of the source S is narrow
rectangle. It is for this reason that the spectrum is referred to as line spectrum.
The fact that the spectrum of any element contains wavelengths that exhibit definite
regularities was utilized in the second half of the 19th century in identifying different elements.
202
---

Slits
Hydrogen
Red
discharge source
Blue green
Blue
violet
Fig. 20.1
Line spectrum of hydrogen
These regularities were classified into certain groups called
the spectral series. The first such series was identified by J.J
Balmer in 1885 in the spectrum of hydrogen. This series,
called the Balmer series, is shown in Fig.20.2, and is in the
visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The results obtained by Balmer were expressed in 1896 by
J.R Rydberg in the following mathematical form
Red
Blue Blue Violet UV
(20.1)
Green
a
Fig. 20.2
where RH is the Rydberg's constant. Its value is
1.0974 X 107 m* Since then many more series have been
discovered and proved helpful in predicting the arrangement
of the electrons in different atoms.
Atomic Spectrum of Hydrogen
The Balmer series contain wavelengths in the visible portion
For Your Information
of the hydrogen spectrum. The spectral lines of hydrogen in
Different types of spectra
the ultraviolet and infrared regions fall into several other
series. In the ultraviolet region, the Lyman series contains the
wavelengths given by the formula
(a) Continuous spectrum
- 1/2 a 1 = -
(20.2)
where
n=2,3,4,
(b) Line spectrum
In the infrared region, three spectral series have been found
whose lines have the wavelengths specified by the formulae:
(c) Band spectrum
203
---

Paschen series
(20.3)
For Your Information
where
5, 6,
91 nm
Brackett series
122 nm
(20.4)
365 nm
where
n = 5, 6, 7,
Pfund series
656 nm
1-R-1
(20.5)
where
n=6,7,8,
820 nm
The existence of these regularities in the hydrogen spectrum
together with similar regularities in the spectra of more
complex elements, proposes a definite test for any theory of
atomic structure.
20.2 BOHR'S MODEL OF THE HYDROGEN
ATOM
In order to explain the empirical results obtained by Rydberg,
Neils Bohr, in 1913, formulated a model of hydrogen atom
utilizing classical physics and Planck's quantum theory. This
semi classical theory is based on the following three
postulates:
Postulate I: An electron, bound to the nucleus in an atom,
can move around the nucleus in certain circular orbits without
radiating. These orbits are called the discrete stationary
states of the atom.
Line spectrum of atomic hydrogen.
Only the Balmer series lies in the
visible region of the electromagnetic
Postulate II: Only those stationary orbits are allowed for
spectrum.
which orbital angular momentum is equal to an integral
multiple of hie.. 2
mvr=nh
(20.6)
where = 1, 2, 3,
and n is called the principal quantum
number, m and V are the mass and velocity of the orbiting
electron respectively, and h is Planck's constant.
204
---

Postulate III: Whenever an electron makes a transition,
that is, jumps from high energy state E to a lower energy
state E, a photon of energy h fis emitted so that
hf=E.-E,
(20.7)
where f= c/n is the frequency of the radiation emitted.
Do You Know?
de-Broglie's Interpretation of Bohr's Orbits
Helium was identified in the Sun
At the time of formulation of Bohr's theory, there was no
using spectroscopy before it was
justification for the first two postulates, while Postulate III had
discovered on earth.
some roots in Planck's thesis. Later on with the development
of de Broglie's hypothesis, some justification could be seen in
Postulate II as explained below:
A
A
(a)
n=3
(c)
n=6
Fig. 20.3 Stationary wave for n=3
Standing de Broglie waves of electrons around the circumference of Bohr orbits.
on a string.
Consider a string of length l as shown in Fig. 20.3 (a). If this is
put into stationary vibrations, we must have l = na where n is
an integer. Suppose that the string is bent into circle of radius
r, as demonstrated for n=3 and n=6 in Fig. 20.3 (b) and (c),
so that
=2 RT=nX
2
or
2= n
(20.8)
From de Broglie's hypothesis
h
h
2= p mv
h
2
TC
r
thus
mv
n
nh
or
2
which is Postulate II.
205
---

Quantized Radii
Consider a hydrogen atom in which electron moving with velocity
Vn is in stationary circular orbit of radius r From Eq. (20.6),
(20.9)
For this electron to stay in the circular orbit, shown in
V2
M F.
Fig. 20.4, the centripetal force F.=mva is provided by the
m
+e
e
Proton F.
Electron
Coulomb's force where e is the magnitude of charge
on electron as well as on the hydrogen nucleus consisting of
a single proton. Thus,
Fig. 20.4
mva-ko's
(20.10)
where constant constantkisequalto is
For Your Information
After substituting for Vn from Eq. 20.9, we have
n= 3
(20.11)
4n2
13
n=2
where
n=1
12
This agrees with the experimentally measured values and is
called the first Bohr orbit radius of the hydrogen atom. Thus
according to Bohr's theory, the radii of different stationary
orbits of the electrons in the hydrogen atom are given by
The first Bohr orbit in the hydrogen
Substituting the value of rn from Eq. 20.11 in Eq. 20.9, the
atom has a radius r. = 5.3 x 10th m.
speed of electron in the nth orbit is
The second and third Bohr orbits
have radii E2 =4r, and r,=9r,
respectively.
v.=2ke2
(20.12)
Quantized Energies
Let us now calculate the total energy E, of the electron in the
Bohr orbit; E1 is the sum of the kinetic energy K.E. and the
potential energy U.i.e.,
E, = +
(20.13)
206
---

By rearranging Eq. (20.10), we get
ke2
(20.14)
Do You Know?
then
(20.15)
The orbital electrons have specific
amount of energies where as free
By substituting the value of rn from Eq. (20.11), we have
electrons may have any amount of
energy.
(20.16)
where
E.=2n*k2me*
constant=13.6
eV
which is the energy required to completely remove an electron
from the first Bohr orbit. This is called ionization energy. The
ionization energy may be provided to the electron by collision
with an external electron. The minimum potential through
which this external electron should be accelerated so that it
can supply the requisite ionization energy is known as
ionization potential. Thus for n = 1, 2, 3 we get
the
allowed energy levels of a hydrogen atom to be
The experimentally measured value of the binding energy of
the electron in the hydrogen atom is in perfect agreement
with the value predicted by Bohr theory.
Normally the electron in the hydrogen atom is in the lowest
energy state corresponding to n = 1 and this state is called
the ground state or normal state. When it is in higher orbit, it is
said to be in the excited state. The atom may be exited by
collision with externally accelerated electron. The potential
through which an electron should be accelerated so that, on
collision it can lift the electron in the atom from its ground
state to some higher state, is known as excitation potential.
Hydrogen Emission Spectrum
The results derived above for the energy levels along with
Postulate III can be used to arrive at the expression for the
wavelength of the hydrogen spectrum. Suppose that the
electron in the hydrogen atom is in the excited state n with
207
---

energy E, and makes a transition to a lower state p with
energy Ep, where , then
Do You Know?
hf=E-E,
Photon must have energy exactly
equal to the energy difference
where
between the two shells for excitation
of an atom but an electron with K.E
greater that the required difference
can excite the gas atoms.
hence
Substituting for f=c/h and rearranging
or
(20.17)
E (eV)
where RH is the Rydberg constant given by the equation
0
n=w
-0.28
n=7
-0.38
n=6
R-====1.0974x10"m"
(20.18)
-0.54
n=5
-0.85
n=4 which agrees well with the latest measured value for
hydrogen atom.
-1.51
n=3
Paschen
Eq. 20.17 reduces to the empirical result derived by Rydberg
and given by Eq 20.1, provided that we substitute p=2 and
n =3,4,5
The different energy levels corresponding to
-3.40
n=2
Balmer
Eq. 20.17 are shown in Fig. 20.5.
Example 20.1: Find the speed of the electron in the first
Bohr orbit.
Solution:
Series Limit
The speed found from Eq. (20.12) is
v,=2.19x10°ms`
13.60
n=1
Lyman
20.3 INNER SHELL TRANSITIONS AND
Fig. 20.5 Energy level diagram for
CHARACTERISTIC X-RAYS
the hydrogen atom.
The transitions of electrons in the hydrogen or other light
elements result in the emission of spectral lines in the infrared,
visible or ultraviolet region of electromagnetic spectrum due to
small energy differences in the transition levels.
208
---

In heavy atoms, the electrons are assumed to be arranged in
Ejected
concentric shells labeled as K, L, M, N, o etc., the K shell
electron
being closest to the nucleus, the L shell next, and so on
(Fig. 20.6). The inner shell electrons are tightly bound and
large amount of energy is required for their displacement
Scattered
electron
from their normal energy levels. After excitation, when an
atom returns to its normal state, photons of larger energy are
emitted. Thus transition of inner shell electrons in heavy
atoms gives rise to the emission of high energy photons or X-
rays. These X-rays consist of series of specific wavelengths
or frequencies and hence are called characteristic X-rays.
M
The study of characteristic X-rays spectra has played a very
N
important role in the study of atomic structure and the
periodic table of elements.
Production of X-rays
Incident
high energy
Fig. 20.7 shows an arrangement of producing X-rays. It
electron
consists of a high vacuum tube called X-ray tube. When
Fig. 20.6
the cathode is heated by the filament F, it emits electrons
which are accelerated towards the anode T. If V is the
High voltage
Cathode
Filament
Tungsten disc
Anode
Cooling oil
Low
voltage
Evacuated glass tube
Fig. 20.7
X-rays
potential difference between C and T, the Kinetic energy K.E.
with which the electron strike the target is given by
K.E. = Ve
(20.19)
Suppose that these fast moving electrons of energy Ve strike
a target made of tungsten or any other heavy element. It is
possible that in collision, the electrons in the innermost
shells, such as K or L, will be knocked out. Suppose that one
of the electrons in the K shell is removed, thereby producing
a vacancy or hole in that shell. The electron from the L shell
209
---

jumps to occupy the hole in the K shell, thereby emitting a
photon of energy h for called the K.X-ray given by
hf_=E-Ex
(20.20)
It is also possible that the electron from the M shell might also
jump to occupy the hole in the K shell. The photons emitted
are Kg X-ray with energies
hfu=Em-E
(20.21)
these photons give rise to Kg X-ray and so on.
The photons emitted in such transitions i.e., inner shell
transitions are called characteristic X-rays, because their
energies depend upon the type of target material.
The holes created in the L and M shells are occupied by
transitions of electrons from higher states creating more
X-rays. The characteristic X-rays appear as discrete lines on
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
a continuous spectrum as shown in Fig. 20.8.
Wavelength (nm)
The Continuous X-ray Spectrum
Fig. 20.6
The continuous spectrum is due to an effect known as
bremsstrahlung or braking radiation When the fast moving
electrons bombard the target, they are suddenly slowed
down on impact with the target. We know that an accelerating
charge emits electromagnetic radiation. Hence, these
impacting electrons emit radiation as they are strongly
decelerated by the target. Since the rate of deceleration is so
large, the emitted radiation correspond to short wavelength
and so the bremsstrahlung is in the X-ray region. In the case
when the electrons lose all their kinetic energy in the first
collision, the entire kinetic energy appears as a X-ray photon
of energy hf mart i.e.,
K.E.=him
The wavelength 2. in Fig. 20.8 corresponds to frequency
finds Other electrons do not lose all their energy in the first
collision. They may suffer a number of collisions before
coming to rest. This will give rise to photons of smaller energy
or X-rays of longer wavelength. Thus the continuous
spectrum is obtained due to deceleration of impacting
electrons.
Properties and Uses of X-rays
X-rays have many practical applications in medicine and
industry. Because X-rays can penetrate several centimetres
210
---

into a solid matter, so they can be used to visualize the
interiors of the materials opaque to ordinary light, such as
For Your Information
fractured bones or defects in structural steel. The object to be
visualized is placed between an X-ray source and a large
sheet of photographic film; the darkening of the film is
proportional to the radiation exposure. A crack or air bubble
allows greater amount of X-rays to pass. This appears as a
dark area on the photographic film. Shadow of bones
appears lighter than the surrounding flesh. It is due to the fact
that bones contain greater proportions of elements with high
atomic number and so they absorb greater amount of
incident X-rays than flesh. In flesh, light elements like carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen predominate. These elements allow
greater amount of incident X-rays to pass through them.
CAT - Scanner
In the recent past, several vastly improved X-ray techniques
have been developed. One widely used system is
An X-ray picture of a hand.
computerized axial tomography; the corresponding
instrument is called CAT-Scanner. The X-ray source
produces a thin fan-shaped beam that is detected on the
opposite side of the subject by an array of several hundred
detectors in a line. Each detector measures absorption of
Interesting Information
X-ray along a thin line through the subject. The entire
apparatus is rotated around the subject in the plane of the
beam during a few seconds. The changing reactions of the
detector are recorded digitally; a computer processes this
information and reconstructs a picture of different densities
over an entire cross section of the subject. Density
differences of the order of one percent can be detected with
CAT-Scans. Tumors, and other anomalies much too small to
be seen with older techniques can be detected.
Biological Effects of X-rays
'In CAT scanning a "fanned-out" array
of X-ray beams is directed through
X-rays cause damage to living tissue. As X-ray photons are
the patient from a number of different
orientations.
absorbed in tissues, they break molecular bonds and create
highly reactive free radicals (such as H and OH), which in
turn can disturb the molecular structure of the proteins and
especially the genetic material. Young and rapidly growing
cells are particularly susceptible; hence
X-rays are useful for selective destruction of cancer cells. On
the other hand a cell may be damaged by radiation but
survive, continue dividing and produce generation of
defective cells. Thus X-rays can cause cancer. Even when
the organism itself shows no apparent damage, excessive
211
---

radiation exposure can cause changes in their reproductive
Do You Know?
system that will affect the organism's offspring.
20.4 UNCERTAINTY WITHIN THE ATOM
One of the characteristics of dual nature of matter is a
fundamental limitation in the accuracy of the simultaneous
measurement of the position and momentum of a particle.
(a)
Heisenberg showed that this is given by the equation
Ap AX2
2
However, these limitations are significant in the realm of
atom. One interesting question is whether electrons are
present in atomic nuclei. As the typical nuclei are loss than
10-14 m in diameter, for an electron to be confined within such a
(b)
nucleus, the uncertainty in its position is of the order of 10-14 m.
(a) This two-dimensional CAT scan
of a brain reveals a large intracranial
The corresponding uncertainty in the electron's momentum is
tumor (colored purple). (b) Three-
dimensional CAT scans are now
available and this example reveals an
arachnoid cyst ( colored yellow)
within a skull. In both photographs the
6.63x10~3 Js
colors are artificial having been
computer generated to aid in
10-14
= 6.63x10-20 gms
m
distinguishing anatomical features.
As
Ap=mAv
6.63x10-20 kgms-1
Hence
Av=
9.11x10-31
7.3x1010
ms-1
kg
Hence, for the electron to be confined to a nucleus, its speed
would have to be greater than 1010 ms i.e., greater than the
speed of light. Because this is impossible, we must conclude
that an electron can never be found inside of a nucleus. But
can an electron reside inside the atom? To find this, we again
calculate the speed of an electron and if it turns to be less
than the speed of light, we have reasonable expectation of
finding the electron within the atom but outside the nucleus.
The radius of the hydrogen atom is about 5x 10-11 m. Applying
the uncertainty principle to the momentum of electron in the
atom we have
Apr Ax h
As
Ap=mAv
Therefore,
Av=m",
212
---

For an atom AX is given as 5 x 10 11 m
Js
Thus
9.11x10-31 kgx5x10 -11 m
1.46x10'ms
This speed of the electron is less than the speed of light,
therefore, it can exist in the atom but outside the nucleus.
20.5 LASER
Laser is the acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation. As the name indicates, lasers are
used for producing an intense, monochromatic, and
unidirectional coherent beam of visible light. To understand
the working of a laser, terms such as stimulated emission and
population inversion must be understood.
Spontaneous and Stimulated Emissions
Consider a sample of free atoms some of which are in the
ground state with energy E, and some in the excited state E2
as shown in Fig. 20.9. The photons of energy hf = E2 - E, are
incident on this sample. These incident photons can interact
E1
with atoms in two different ways. In Fig. 20.9 (a) the incident
hf
E
photon is absorbed by an atom in the ground state E., thereby
E,
E,
leaving the atom in the excited state E2 This process is called
(a)
Induced absorption
stimulated or induced absorption. Once in the excited state,
two things can happen to the atom. (i) It may decay by
E1
E
spontaneous emission as shown in Fig. 20.9 (b), in which the
E,
E,
atom emits a photon of energy h f = E2 - E, in any arbitrary
(b)
Spontaneous emission
direction.
E2
E,
The other alternative for the atom in the excited state E2 is to
hf
decay by stimulated or induced emission as shown in
E,
E,
Fig.20.9 (c). In this case the incident photon of energy
(c)
Induced emission
hf=E2 - E1 induces the atom to decay by emitting a photon
that travels in the direction of the incident photon. For each
Fig 20.9
incident photon we will have two photons going in the same
direction thus we have accomplished two things; an amplified
as well as a unidirectional coherent beam. From a practical
point this is possible only if there is more stimulated or
induced emission than spontaneous emission. This can be
achieved as described in the next section.
213
---

Population Inversion and Laser Action
Let us consider a simple case of a material whose atoms can
reside in three different states as shown in Fig. 20.10, state
~10°s
E2
N3
N3 > N.
E1
Metastable state
hf = 6943 nm
Input
Optical pumping
Optical (amplified)
N.
E,
Fig. 20.10
E. which is ground state; the excited state E in which the
For Your Information
atoms can reside only for 10 S and the metastable state E
in which the atoms can reside for -10 5. much longer than
E
10 S. A metastable state is an excited state in which an
(Larger energy)
excited electron is unusually stable and from which the
E.
electron spontaneously falls to lower state only after
(Smaller energy)
relatively longer time. The transition from or to this state are
(a) Normal population
difficult as compared to other excited states. Hence, instead
A normal population of atomic
of direct excitation to this state, the electrons are excited to
energy state, with more atomic in the
higher level for spontaneous fall to metastable state. Also let
lower energy state E, than in the
us assume that the incident photons of energy h f = E, - E,
excited state E2.
raise the atom from the ground state E, to the excited state E3.
but the excited atoms do not decay back to E.. Thus the only
E
alternative for the atoms in the excited state E, is to decay
E
spontaneously to state E2 the atoms reach state E2 much
(la) Population inversion
faster than they leave state E2 This eventually leads to the
situation that the state E contains more atoms than state E..
A population inversion, in which the
This situation is known as population inversion.
higher energy state has a greater
population than the lower energy
state
Once the population inversion has been reached, the lasing
action of a laser is simple to achieve. The atoms in the
metastable state E2 are bombarded by photons of energy
hf = E2 - E1, resulting in an induced emission, giving an
intense, coherent beam in the direction of the incident
photon.
214
---

The emitted photons must be confined in the assembly long
enough to stimulate further emission from other excited
atoms. This is achieved by using mirrors at the two ends of
Large potential
the assembly. One end is made totally reflecting, and the
difference
other end is partially transparent to allow the laser beam to
escape (Fig.20.11). As the photons move back and forth
o
between the reflecting mirrors they continue to stimulate
other excited atoms to emit photons. As the process
continues the number of photons multiply, and the resulting
Completely
Partially
silvered
silvered
radiation is, therefore, much more intense and coherent than
mirror
mirror
light from ordinary sources.
Fig. 20.11
Helium - Neon Laser
It is a most common type of lasers used in physics
laboratories. Its discharge tube is filled with 85% helium and
15% neon gas. The neon is the lasing or active medium in this
tube. By chance, helium and neon have nearly identical
metastable states, respectively located 20.61 eV and
20.66 eV level. The high voltage electric discharge excites
the electrons in some of the helium atoms to the 20.61 eV
state. In this laser, population inversion in neon is achieved
by direct collisions with same energy electrons of helium
atoms. Thus excited helium atoms collide with neon atoms,
Helium
Neon
Metestable
Metastable
XXXXXX
each transferring its own 20.61 eV of energy to an electron in
Photon
the neon atom along with 0.05 eV of K.E. from the moving
atom. As a result, the electrons in neon atoms are raised to
20.61
20.66 aV
the 20.66 eV state. In this way, a population inversion is
18.70 eV
sustained in the neon gas relative to an energy level of
Ground
Ground
18.70 eV. Spontaneous emission from neon atoms initiate
State
State
laser action and stimulated emission causes electrons in the
neon to drop from 20.66 eV to the 18.70 eV level and red
Fig. 20.12
laser light of wavelength 632.8 nm corresponding to 1.96 eV
energy is generated (Fig. 20.12).
Uses of Laser in Medicine and Industry
1.
Laser beams are used as surgical tool for "welding"
detached retinas.
2.
The narrow intense beam of laser can be used to
destroy tissue in a localized area. Tiny organelles
with a living cell have been destroyed by using laser
to study how the absence of that organelle affects the
behavior of the cell.
3.
Finely focused beam of laser has been used to
destroy cancerous and pre-cancerous cell.
215
---

4.
The heat of the laser seals off capillaries and lymph
Do You Know?
vessels to prevent spread of the disease.
5.
The intense heat produced in small area by a laser
beam is also used for welding and machining metals
and for drilling tiny holes in hard materials.
6.
The precise straightness of a laser beam is also
useful to surveyors for lining up equipment especially
in inaccessible locations.
7.
It is potential energy source for inducing fusion
reactions.
8.
It can be used for telecommunication along optical
The helium-neon laser beam is being
used to diagnose diseases of the eye,
fibres.
The use of laser technology in the
field of ophthalmology is widespread.
9.
Laser beam can be used to generate three-
dimensional images of objects in a process called
holography.
SUMMARY
When an atomic gas or vapours at less than atmospheric pressure is suitably
excited, usually by passing electric current through it, the emitted radiation has a
spectrum which contains certain specific wavelenghts only.
Postulates of Bohr's model of hydrogen atom are:
An electron, bound to the nucleus in an atom, can move around the nucleus in
certain circular orbits without radiating. These orbits are called the discrete
stationary states of the atom.
II.
Only those stationary states are allowed for which orbital angular momentum is
equal to an integral multiple of hi.e., mvr=nh
III.
Whenever an electron makes a transition, i.e., jumps from high energy state E, to
a
lower energy state E a photon of energy h fis emitted so that hf=E.-E. -
The transition of electrons in the hydrogen or other light elements result in the
emission of spectral lines in the infrared, visible or ultraviolet region of
electromagnetic spectrum due to small energy differences in the transition levels.
The X-rays emitted in inner shell transitions are called characteristic X-rays,
because their energy depends upon the type of target material.
The X-rays that are emitted in all directions and with a continuous range of
frequencies are known as continuous X-rays.
Laser is the acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
216
---

The incident photon absorbed by an atom in the ground state E, thereby leaving
the atom in the excited state E2 is called stimulated or induced absorption.
Spontaneous or induced emission is that in which the atom emits a photon of energy
hf=E2 - E, in any arbitrary direction.
Stimulated or induced emission is that in which the incident photon of energy hf=E2-E,
induces the atom to decay by emitting a photon that travels in the direction of the
incident photon. For each incident photon, we will have two photons going in the same
direction giving rise to an amplified as well as a unidirectional coherent beam.
QUESTIONS
20.1
Bohr's theory of hydrogen atom is based upon several assumptions. Do any of these
assumptions contradict classical physics?
20.2 What is meant by a line spectrum? Explain, how line spectrum can be used for the
identification of elements?
20.3
Can the electron in the ground state of hydrogen absorb a photon of energy
13.6 eV and greater than 13.6 eV?
20.4
How can the spectrum of hydrogen contain so many lines when hydrogen contains
one electron?
20.5
Is energy conserved when an atom emits a photon of light?
20.6
Explain why a glowing gas gives only certain wavelengths of light and why that gas is
capable of absorbing the same wavelengths? Give a reason why it is transparent to
other wavelengths?
20.7
What do we mean when we say that the atom is excited?
20.8
Can X-rays be reflected, refracted diffracted and polarized just like any other
waves? Explain.
20.9
What are the advantages of lasers over ordinary light?
20.10 Explain why laser action could not occur without population inversion between
atomic levels?
PROBLEMS
20.1
A hydrogen atoms is in its ground state (n = 1.) Using Bohr's theory, calculate
(a) the radius of the orbit, (b) the linear momentum of the electron, (c) the angular.
momentum of the electron (d) the kinetic energy (e) the potential energy, and
(f) the total energy.
[Ans: (a) 0.529x10110 m (b) 1.99 x 10 29 kgms1 (c) 1.05x 10 kgm's
(d) 13.6 eV (e)-27.2eV(f)-13.6eV] -
217
---

20.2
What are the energies in eV of quanta of wavelength? i = 400, 500 and 700 nm.
(Ans: 3.10 eV, 2.49 eV, 1.77 eV)
20.3
An electron jumps from a level E =-3.5x1019 J to E, = -1.20 X 10 J. What is the
wavelength of the emitted light?
(Ans: 234 nm)
20.4
Find the wavelength of the spectral line corresponding to the transition in hydrogen
from n = 6 state to n = 3 state?
(Asn: 1094 mm)
20.5
Compute the shortest wavelength radiation in the Balmer series? What value of n
must be used?
(Ans: 364.5 nm, n = so)
20.6
Calculate the longest wavelength of radiation for the Paschen series.
(Ans: 1875 mm)
20.7
Electrons in an X-ray tube are accelerated through a potential difference of
3000 V. If these electrons were slowed down in a target, what will be the minimum
wavelength of X-rays produced?
(Ans:4.14x10"m)
20.8
The wavelength of K X-ray from copper is 1.377 X 10-10 m. What is the energy
difference between the two levels from which this transition results?
(Ans: 9.03 keV)
20.9
A tungsten target is struck by electrons that have been accelerated from rest through
40 kV potential difference. Find the shortest wavelength of the bremsstrahlung
radiation emitted.
(Ans: :0.31x101"m)
2010 The orbital electron of a hydrogen atom moves with a speed of 5.456 x 10 ms
(a) Find the value of the quantum number n associated with this electron.
(b) Calculate the radius of this orbit.
(c) Find the energy of the electron in this orbit.
(Ans: n=4, r = 0.846 nm; E, = -0.85 eV)
218
---