
Chapter
12
ELECTROSTATICS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1.
Understand and describe Coulomb's law.
2.
Describe that a charge has a field of force around it.
3.
Understand fields of like and unlike charges.
4.
Appreciate the principle of inkjet printers and photostat copier as an application of
electrostatic phenomena.
5.
Explain the electric intensity in a free space and in other media.
6.
State and prove Gauss's law.
7.
Appreciate the applications of Gauss's law.
8.
Explain electric potential at a point in terms of work done in bringing a unit positive
charge from infinity to that point.
9.
Relate electric field strength and potential gradient.
10.
Find expression for potential at a point due to a point charge.
11.
Describe and derive the value of electric charge by Millikan's method.
12.
Calculate the capacitance of parallel plate capacitor.
13.
Recognize the effect of dielectric on the capacitance of parallel plate capacitor.
14.
Understand and describe electric polarization of dielectric.
15.
Know the process of charging and discharging of a capacitor through a resistance
and calculate the time constant.
16.
Find energy expression of a charged capacitor.
T
he study of electric charges at rest under the action of electric forces is known as
electrostatics. An electric force is the force which holds the positive and negative charges
that make up atoms and molecules. The human body is composed entirely of atoms and
molecules, thus we owe our existence to the electric force.
1
---

12.1 COULOMB'S LAW
We know that there are two kinds of charges, namely,
positive and negative charges. The charge on an electron is
assumed to be negative and charge on a proton is positive.
Moreover, we also learnt that like charges repel each other
and unlike charges attract each other. Now we investigate
the quantitative nature of these forces. The first
measurement of the force between electric charges was
made in 1874 AD by Charles Coulomb, a French military
engineer. On the basis of these measurements, he deduced
a law known as Coulomb's law. It states that
A lightning flash
The force between two point charges is directly proportional
to the product of the magnitudes of charges and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them.
It is mathematically expressed as
Fx9192
or
2
r
F=k9,92
(12.1)
where F is the magnitude of the mutual force that acts on
each of the two point charges q, , q2 and r is the distance
F
+q,
+92
F2+
between them. The force F always acts along the line joining
the two point charges (Fig. 12.1), k is the constant of
(a)
&
>
proportionality. Its value depends upon the nature of medium
between the two charges and system of units in which F, q
F
F29
and r are measured. If the medium between the two point
+q.
-q2
charges is free space and the system of units is SI, then k is
€
->
represented as
(b)
Fig 12.1 (a) Repulsive forces
K=4760
(12.2)
between like charges and (b)
attractive forces between unlike
charges
where E. is an electrical constant, known as permittivity of
free space. In SI units, its value is 8.85 x 10 Nm3
Substituting the value of E. the constant
k C2
Thus Coulomb's force in free space is
F = 1 9192
(12.3)
p2
2
---

As stated earlier, Coulombs' force is mutual force, it means
that if q, exerts a force on q2 then q2 also exerts an equal and
opposite force on q1. If we denote the force exerted on q2 by q,
as F21 and that on charge q, due to q2 as F12, 12 then
F-
(12.4)
F29
92
The magnitude of both these two forces is the same and is
A
F21
given by Eq. 12.3. To represent the direction of these forces
we introduce unit vectors. If is the unit vector directed from
q2
q,toq,andrist the unit vector directed from q2 to q.. then
12.5 (a)
(a)
9,
and
12.5 (b)
Fu
The forces F.and F, are shown in Fig. 12.2 (a & b). It can be
To
seen that so Eqs. 12.5 (a & b) show that
(b)
Fig. 12.2
F21=-F12
The sign of the charges in Eqs. 12.5 (a & b) determine
whether the forces are attractive or repulsive.
Table 2.1
We shall now consider the effect of medium between the two
Material
E,
charges upon the Coulomb's force. If the medium is an
insulator, it is usually referred as dielectric. It has been found
Vacuum
1
that the presence of a dielectric always reduces the
Air (1 atm)
1.0006
Ammonia (liquid)
22-25
electrostatic force as compared with that in free space by a
Bakelite
5-18
certain factor which is a constant for the given dielectric. This
Benzene
2.284
constant is known as relative permittivity and is represented
Germanium
16
by E,. The values of relative permittivity of different dielectrics
Glass
4.8-10
are given in Table 12.1.
Mica
3-7.5
Paraffined paper
2
Thus the Coulomb's force in a medium of relative permittivity
Plexiglas
3.40
E, is given by
Rubber
2.94
Teflon
2.1
(12.6)
Transformer oil
2.1
Water (distilled)
78.5
It can be seen in the table that E, for air is 1.0006. This value is
so close to one that with negligible error, the Eq. 12.3 gives
the electric force in air.
Example 12.1: Charges q, = 100 uC and q2 = 50 uC are
located in xy-plane at positions r,=3.0j = and r2 = 4.0i respectively,
3
---

where the distances are measured in metres, Calculate the
force on q2 (Fig. 12.3).
Solution: q, = 100 HC,
50 uC
Position vector of q2 relative to q,
=4i-3j
r= magnitude of /(mm) +(-3m) =5m
0
92
o
r,=4.01
Fig. 12.3
9 x 10 9 Nm2-2 (5m)2 x4i-3
F21
Magnitude of F21 (-1.08) = 1.8 N
Direction of -1.08 - axis
12.2 FIELDS OF FORCE
Newton's universal gravitational law and Coulomb's law
enable us to calculate the magnitude as well as the directions
of the gravitational and electric forces, respectively. However
one may question, (a) What are the origins of these forces?
(b) How are these forces transmitted from one mass to
another or from one charge to another?
The answer to (a) is still unknown; the existence of these
forces is accepted as it is. That is why they are called basic
forces of nature.
To describe the mechanism by which electric force is
transmitted, Michael Faraday (1791-1867) introduced the
concept of an electric field. According to his theory, it is the
intrinsic property of nature that an electric field exists in the
space around an electric charge. This electric field is
considered to be a force field that exerts a force on other
charges placed in that field. For example, a charge q
produces an electric field in the space surrounding it. This
4
---

field exists whether the other charges are present in space or
not. However, the presence of field cannot be tested until
another charge q. is brought into the field. Thus the field of
charge q interacts with qo to produce an electrical force. The
interaction between q and q. is accomplished in two steps:
(a) the charge q produces a field and (b) the field interacts
with charge q. to produce a force F on 9. These two steps are
illustrated in Fig. 12.4.
In this figure the density of dots is proportional to the strength
of the field at the various points. We may define electric field
strength or electric field intensity E at any point in the field as
(a)
E-F
(12.7)
90
where F is the force experienced by a positive test charge 9.
placed at the point. The test charge q. has to be very small so
F=q.E
that it may not distort the field which it has to measure.
Since electric field intensity is force per unit charge, it is
measured in newton per coulomb in SI units. It is a vector
quantity and its direction is the same as that of the force F.
(b)
The force experienced by a test charge q. placed in the field
Fig. 12.4 (a) Dots surrounding the
of a charge q in vacuum is given by Eq. (12.3),
positive charge indicate the presence
Eq. 12.7 can be used to evaluate electric intensity due to a
of the electric field. The density of the
point charge q at a point distant r from it. Place a positive test
dots is proportional to the strength of
the electric field at different points.
charge q. at this point. The Coulomb's force that this charge
(b) Interaction of the field with the
will experience due to q is
charge q.
(12.8)
where r is a unit vector directed from the point charge q to the
test point where q. has been placed, i.e. the point where the
electric intensity is to be evaluated. By Eq. 12.7
E-F-1_99, 90 F 4, r2 90 i
(12.9)
Example 12.2: Two positive point charges q, = 16.0 C
and q2 = 4.0 C are separated by a distance of 3.0 m, as
<- d
shown in Fig. 12.5. Find the spot on the line joining the two
+9,
P
+92
charges where electric field is zero.
3.0 m
Solution: Between the charges, the two field contribution
Fig. 12.5
has opposite directions, and electric field would be zero at a
5
---

point P, where the magnitude of E1 equals that of E2. In the
Fig. 12.5, let the distance of P from q2 be d.
AtP,
E,=E2,
which implies that,
+Go
1
q,
4, (3.0-d)2 4, d2
+90
16.0 x 10 6 C
4.0x1066
or
+90
+90
9+d2-6d
d2
or
d2+2-3=0, which gives d=+1 m, .3m
(a)
There are two possible values of d, the negative value
corresponds to a location off to the right of both the charges
where magnitudes of E1 and E2 are equal but directions are
same. In this case E1 and E2 do not cancel at this spot. The
positive value corresponds to the location shown in figure
and is the zero field location, hence, d = + 1.0m.
+q
12.3 ELECTRIC FIELD LINES
A visual representation of the electric field can be obtained in
terms of electric field lines; an idea proposed by Michael
(b)
Faraday. Electric field lines can be thought of a "map" that
provides information about the direction and strength of the
Fig. 12.6 (a) Apositive test charge +9.
placed anywhere in the vicinity of a
electric field at various places. As electric field lines provide
positive point charge +q, experiences
information about the electric force exerted on a charge, the
a repulsive force directed radially
lines are commonly called "lines of force".
outward. (b) the electric field lines are
directed radially outward from the
To introduce electric field lines, we place positive test
positive point charge +q.
charges each of magnitude q. at different places but at equal
distances from a positive charge +q as shown in the figure.
Each test charge will experience a repulsive force, as
indicated by arrows in Fig. 12.6(a). Therefore, the electric
field created by the charge +q is directed radially outward.
Fig. 12.6 (b) shows corresponding field lines which show the
field direction. Fig. 12.7 shows the electric field lines in the
vicinity of a negative charge -q. In this case the lines are
directed radially "inward", because the force on a positive
test charge is now of attraction, indicating the electric field
points inward.
Figures 12.6 and 12.7 represent two dimensional pictures of
the field lines. However, electric field lines emerge from the
Fig. 12.7 The electric field lines are
charges in three dimensions, and an infinite number of lines
directed radially inward towards a
could be drawn.
negative point charge -q.
The electric field lines "map" also provides information about
6
---

the strength of the electric field. As we notice in
Figs. 12.6 and 12.7 that field lines are closer to each other
near the charges where the field is strong while they
continuously spread out indicating a continuous decrease in
the field strength.
"The number of lines per unit area passing
perpendicularly through an area is proportional
to the magnitude of the electric field".
The electric field lines are curved in case of two identical
separated charges. Fig. 12.8 shows the pattern of lines
Fig.
The electric field lines for
associated with two identical positive point charges of equal
two identical positive point charges.
magnitude. It reveals that the lines in the region between two
like charges seem to repel each other. The behaviour of two
identical negatively charges will be exactly the same. The
middle region shows the presence of a zero field spot or
neutral zone.
The Fig. 12.9 shows the electric field pattern of two opposite
+q
q
charges of same magnitudes. The field lines start from
positive charge and end on a negative charge. The electric
field at points such as 1, 2, 3 is the resultant of fields created
by the two charges at these points. The directions of the
resultant intensities is given by the tangents drawn to the field
lines at these points.
Fig.
12.9
Attractive forces between
unlike charges
In the regions where the field lines are parallel and equally
spaced, the same number of lines pass per unit area and
+q
-9
therefore, field is uniform on all points. Fig.12.10 shows the
field lines between the plates of a parallel plate capacitor. The
field is uniform in the middle region where field lines are
equally spaced.
We are now in a position to summarize the properties
of electric field lines.
1)
Electric field lines originate from positive charges
and end on negative charges.
2)
The tangent to a field line at any point gives the
direction of the electric field at that point.
3)
The lines are closer where the field is strong and the
Fig 1210 In the central region of a
lines are farther apart where the field is weak.
parallel plate capacitor the electric
field lines are parallel and evenly
4)
No two lines cross each other. This is because E has
spaced, indicating that the electric
field there has the same magnitude
only one direction at any given point. If the lines cross,
and direction at all points.
E could have more than one direction.
7
---

(1)
Xerography (Photocopier)
Fig.12.11 illustrates a photocopy machine. The copying
page to be copied - face down
lens
lamp
toner cartridge
drum
containing black
toner dust
printed image
paper on which the
heated rollers
image is printed
Fitz Tour Intermation
Fig.
1211 The basics of photocopying. The lamp transfers an image of the page to
the drum, which leaves a static charge. The drum collects toner dust and transfers
it
to the paper. The toner is melted onto the page.
process is called xerography, from the Greek word "xeros"
and "graphos", meaning "dry writing". The heart of machine
is a drum which is an aluminium cylinder coated with a layer
of selenium. Aluminium is an excellent conductor. On the
other hand, selenium is an insulator in the dark and becomes
a conductor when exposed to light; it is a photoconductor. As
a result, if a positive charge is sprinkled over the selenium it
will remain there as long as it remains in dark. If the drum is
exposed to light, the electrons from aluminium pass through
the conducting selenium and neutralize the positive charge.
If the drum is exposed to an image of the document to be
This computer Image shows the
copied, the dark and light areas of the document produce
electric field lines generated by the
corresponding areas on the drum. The dark areas retain their
fish at the top of the picture. Through
positive charge, but light areas become conducting, lose
the electric field, the presence of
other fish can be detected, such as
their positive charge and become neutral.
the one silhouetted at the bottom.
In this way, a positive charge image of the document remains
on the selenium surface. Then a special dry, black powder
called "toner" is given a negative charge and spread over the
drum, where it sticks to the positive charged areas.
The toner from the drum is transferred on to a sheet of paper
on which the document is to be copied. Heated pressure
8
---

rollers then melt the toner into the paper which is also given
an excess positive charge to produce the permanent
impression of the document.
(ii)
Inkjet Printers
An inkjet printer (Fig. 12.12 a) is a type of printer which uses
electric charge in its operation. While shuttling back and forth
across the paper, the inkjet printer "ejects" a thin stream of
ink. The ink is forced out of a small nozzle and breaks up into
extremely small droplets. During their flight, the droplets pass
through two electrical components, a "charging electrode"
and the "deflection plates" (a parallel plate capacitor). When
the printhead moves over regions of the paper which are not
to be inked, the charging electrode is left on and gives the ink
droplets a net charge. The deflection plates divert such
charged drops into a gutter and in this way such drops are not
able to reach the paper. Whenever ink is to be placed on the
Flg. 12.12 (a) An inkjet printer.
paper, the charging control, responding to computer, turns off
the charging electrode. The uncharged droplets fly straight
through the deflection plates and strike the paper. Schematic
diagram of such a printer is shown by Fig. 12.12 (b).
Charging
Deflection plates
electrode
Nozzie of
printhead
Gutter
Charging
Paper
control
Ink
supply
instructions from computer
Flg. 12.12 (b) An inkjet printhead ejects a steady flow of ink droplets. The charging
electrodes are used to charge the droplets that are not needed on the paper.
Charged droplets are deflected into a gutter by the deflection plates, while
uncharged droplets fly straight onto the paper,
B
Inkjet printers can also produce coloured copies.
12.5 ELECTRIC FLUX
When we place an element of area in an electric field, some
of the lines of force pass through it (Fig. 12.13a a).
The number of the field lines passing through a certain element
of area is known as electric flux through that area. It is usually
denoted by Greek letter O. For example the flux 0 through the
area A in Fig. 12.13 (a) is 4 while the flux through B is 2.
Fig. 12.13 (a) Electric flux through a
In order to give a quantitative meaning to flux, the field lines
surface normal to E.
are drawn such that the number of field lines passing through
9
---

a unit area held perpendicular to field lines at a point
represent the intensity E of the field at that point. Suppose at
a given point the value of E is 4NC1. This means that if 1m2
A
E
area is held perpendicular to field lines at this point, 4 field
lines will pass through it. In order to establish relation
between electric flux O. electric intensity E and area A we
consider the Fig. 12.13 (b,c,d) which shows the three
dimensional representation of the electric field lines due to a
uniform electric field of intensity E.
Fig. 12.13 (b) Maximum
In 12.13 (b), area is held perpendicular to the field lines,
then EA lines pass through it. The flux Q. in this case is
A
.=EA
(12.10)
E
where A denotes that the area is held perpendicular to field
lines. In Fig.12.13 (c), area A is held parallel to field lines and,
as is obvious no lines cross this area, so that flux 0. in this
case is
.=EA=0
(12.11)
Fig. 12.13 (c) Minimum
where A1 indicates that A is held parallel to the field lines.
Fig. 12.13 (d) shows the case when A is neither perpendicular
A
nor parallel to field lines but is inclined at angle 0 with the
lines. In this case we have to find the projection of the area
which is perpendicular to the field lines. The area of this
B
E
projection, (Fig. 12.13c is A COS 0. The flux 0 in this case is
A
.=EAcos 0
A cos8
Usually the element of area is represented by a vector area A
whose magnitude is equal to the surface area A of the
Fig.12.13(d)
element and whose direction is direction of normal to the
area. The electric flux 0. through a patch of flat surface in
terms of E and A is then given by
EAcose=E.A
(12.12)
where 0 is the angle between the field lines and the normal to
the area.
Electric flux, being a scalar product, is a scalar quantity. Its SI
unit is Nm2
12.6 ELECTRIC FLUX THROUGH A
SURFACE ENCLOSING A CHARGE
Let us calculate the electric flux through a closed surface, in
shape of a sphere of radius r due to a point charge q
10
---

placed at the centre of sphere as shown in Fig. 12.14. To
E
apply the formula Q. = E.A for the computation of electric flux,
the surface area should be flat. For this reason the total
AA
surface area of the sphere is divided into n small patches with
areas of magnitudes , , . If n is very large,
each patch would be a flat element of area. The
corresponding vector areas are , , , ,
respectively. The direction of each vector area is along
+q
perpendicular drawn outward to the corresponding patch.
The electric intensities at the centres of vector areas
AA
, are E1, E2
E respectively.
According to Eq.12.12, the total flux passing through the
closed surface is
Fig. 12.14 The total electric flux through
the surface of the sphere due to a
= E. AA, + E + E, (12.13)
charge q at its centre is q/e.
The direction of electric intensity and vector area is same at
each patch. Moreover, because of spherical symmetry, at the
surface of sphere,
E
(12.14)
P.=EA,+++......
+q
=Ex(AA,+AA,+AA,+
+AA,
spherical surface area)
0.2%
(12.15)
Fig. 12.15
Now imagine that a closed surface S is enclosing this sphere.
It can be seen in Fig. 12.15 that the flux through the closed
surface S is the same as that through the sphere. So we can
conclude that total flux through a closed surface does not
depend upon the shape or geometry of the closed surface. It
depends upon the medium and the charge enclosed.
OF
of
a.
12.7 GAUSS'S LAW
a,
Suppose point charges q19 q2 93.
,
q are arbitrarily
a
distributed in an arbitrary shaped closed surface as shown in
Fig. 12.16. Using idea given in previous section, the electric
flux passing through the closed surface is
Fig. 12.16
11
---

&0
+9,)
charge enclosed by closed surface)
(12.16)
where
Q=q,+q2+q,+ + 9n is the total charge enclosed
by closed surface. Eq. 12.16 is mathematical expression of
Gauss's law which can be stated as,
"The flux through any closed surface is
1/eg times the total charge enclosed in it".
12.8 APPLICATIONS OF GAUSS'S LAW
Gauss's law is applied to calculate the electric intensity due
to different charge configurations. In all such cases, an
imaginary closed surface is considered which passes
through the point at which the electric intensity is to be
evaluated. This closed surface is known as Gaussian
surface. Its choice is such that the flux through it can be easily
evaluated. Next the charge enclosed by Gaussian surface is
calculated and finally the electric intensity is computed by
applying Gauss's law Eq.12.16. We will illustrate this
procedure by considering some examples.
(a) Intensity of Field Inside a Hollow Charged
Sphere
+
+
Suppose that a hollow conducting sphere of radius R is given
a positive charge q. We wish to calculate the field intensity
+
Gaussian Surface
first at a point inside the sphere.
+
+
+
R'
+
Now imagine a sphere of radius R<R to be inscribed within
the hollow charged sphere as shown in Fig. 12.17. The
+
+
surface of this sphere is the Gaussian surface. Let 0 be flux
+
+
through this closed surface. It can be seen in the figure that
the charge enclosed by the Gaussian surfaces is zero.
R
+
Applying Gaussian law, we have
+
+
+
Flg. 12.17
Since
D. =E.A=0 as A=0, therefore, E=0
12
---

Thus the interior of a hollow charged metal sphere is a field
free region. As a consequence, any apparatus placed within
a metal enclosure is "shielded" from electric fields.
Do You Know?
(b)
Electric Intensity Due to an Infinite Sheet of
To eliminate stray electric field
Charge
interference, circuits of sensitive
electronics devices such as T.V and
Suppose we have a plane sheet of infinite extent on which
Computers are often enclosed within
positive charges are uniformly distributed. The uniform
metal boxes.
surface charge density is, say, o. A finite part of this sheet is
shown in Fig. 12.18. To calculate the electric intensity E at a
point P. close to the sheet, imagine a closed Gaussian
surface in the form of a cylinder passing through the sheet,
whose one flat face contains point P. From symmetry we can
conclude that E points at right angle to the end faces and
away from the plane. Since E is parallel to the curved surface
of the cylinder, so there is no contribution to flux from the
E
curved wall of the cylinder. While it will be,
EA + EA = 2 EA, through the two flat end faces of the closed
E
cylindrical surface, where A is the surface area of the flat
faces (Fig. 12.18). As the charge enclosed by the closed
surface is OA, therefore, according to Gauss's law,
Fig. 12.18 The closed surface is in
X enclosed closed surface
charge by
the form of a cylinder whose one face
contains the point P at which electric
intensity has to be determined.
XOA.
(12.17)
Therefore,
2EA
=
XOA
or
E=20
(12.18)
2sp
In vector form,
E=26a
(12.19)
where is a unit vector normal to the sheet directed away from it.
(c)
Electric Intensity Between Two Oppositely
+
Charged Parallel Plates
Suppose that two parallel and closely spaced metal plates of
infinite extent separated by vacuum are given opposite
charges. Under these conditions the charges are essentially
concentrated on the inner surfaces of the plates. The field
Fig 12.19 The lines of force between
lines which originate on positive charges on the inner face
the plates are normal to the plates
of one plate, terminate on negative charges on the inner
and are directed from the positive
face of the other plate (Fig. 12.19). Thus the charges
plate towards the negative one.
13
---

are uniformly distributed on the inner surface of the plate in a
form of sheet of charges of surface density o = q/A, where A
is the area of plate and q is the amount of charge on either of
the plates.
Imagine now, a Gaussian surface in the form of a hollow box
with its top inside the upper metal plate and its bottom in the
space between the plates as shown in Fig. 12.20. As the field
lines are parallel to the sides of the box, therefore, the flux
through the sides is zero. The field lines are uniformly
distributed on the lower bottom face and are directed
Fig. 12.20 Dotted rectangle
represents the cross section of
normally to it. If A is the area of this face and E the electric
Gaussian box with its top inside the
intensity at its site, the flux through it would be EA. There is no
upper metal plate and its bottom in
flux through the upper end of the box because there is no field
the dielectric between the plates.
inside the metal plate. Thus the total flux 0. through the
Gaussian surface is EA. The charge enclosed by the
Gaussian surface is OA. Applying Gauss's law
.= 1 XOA
1
or
EA
so
or
(12.20)
&g
The field intensity is the same at all points between the plates.
The direction of field is from positive to negative plate because
a unit positive charge anywhere between the plates would be
repelled from positive and attracted to negative plate and
these forces are in the same direction. In vector form
E=
(12.21)
Eg
where r is a unit vector directed from positive to negative plate.
12.9 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
Let us consider a positive charge qo which is allowed to move
B
in an electric field produced between two oppositely charged
parallel plates as shown in Fig. 12.21 (a). The positive charge
will move from plate B to A and will gain K.E. If it is to be moved
+q
from A to B, an external force is needed to make the charge
move against the electric field and will gain P.E. Let us impose
Q.E
a condition that as the charge is moved from A to B, it is moved
A
keeping electrostatic equilibrium, i.e., it moves with uniform
Flg. 12.21 (a)
velocity. This condition could be achieved by applying a force
F equal and opposite to q.E at every point along its path
14
---

as shown in Fig. 12.21 (b). The work done by the external
force against the electric field increases electrical potential
energy of the charge that is moved.
B +
F
Let WAB be the work done by the force in carrying the positive
charge 9. from A to B while keeping the charge in equilibrium.
The change in its potential energy AU=WAB
or
U-U=WAB
(12.22)
a.E
A
where UA and UBI are defined to be the potential energies at
Fig. 12.21 (b)
points A and B, respectively.
To describe electric field we introduce the idea of electric
potential difference. The potential difference between two
points A and B in an electric field is defined as the work done
in carrying a unit positive charge from A to B while keeping the
charge in equilibrium, that is,
Do You Know?
(12.23)
where VA and VB are defined electric potentials at point A and
B respectively. Electric potential energy difference and
electric potential difference between the points A and B are
related as
AU=q.AV=W18
(12.24)
Thus the potential difference between the two points can be
defined as the difference of the potential energy per unit
charge.
An ECG records the "voltage"
between points on human skin
generated by electrical process in the
As the unit of P.E. is joule, Eq.12.23 shows that the unit of
heart. This ECG is made in running
potential difference is joule per coulomb. It is called volt such that,
position providing information about
the heart's performance under stress.
1
(12.25)
1coulomb
That is, a potential difference of 1 volt exists between two
points if work done in moving a unit positive charge from one
point to other, keeping equilibrium, is one joule.
In order to give a concept of electric potential at a point in an
electric field, we must have a reference to which we assign
zero electric potential. This point is usually taken at infinity.
Thus in Eq. 12.23, if we take A to be at infinity and choose
VA=0, the electric potential at B will be VB=W or dropping
the subscripts.
v=w
(12.26)
15
---

which states that the electric potential at any point in an
electric field is equal to work done in bringing a unit positive
charge from infinity to that point keeping it in equilibrium. It is
to be noted that potential at a point is still potential difference
between the potential at that point and potential at infinity.
Do You Know?
Both potential and potential differences are scalar quantities
because both /and q. are scalars.
Electric Field as Potential Gradient
Electrodes connected
to detection and
In this section we will establish a relation between electric
recording device
intensity and potential difference. As a special case, let us
consider the situation shown in Fig. 12.21 (b). The electric
field between the two charged plates is uniform, let its value
be E. The potential difference between A and B is given by the
equation
EEG (Normal alpha rhythm)
VB VA = WAB
(12.27)
where - (the negative sign is needed
Potential
difference
because F must be applied opposite to q.E so as to keep it in
equilibrium). With this, Eq. 12.27 becomes
Time
V- VA = q.Ed 90 =-Ed
or
(12.28)
d d
EEG (Abnormal)
If the plates A & B are separated by infinitesimally small
distance Ar, the Eq. 12.28 is modified as
E ==Av
(12.29)
Potential
difference
The quantity AV gives the maximum value of the rate of
Ar
Time
change of potential with distance because the charge has
been moved along a field line along which the distance Ar
between the two plates is minimum. It is known as potential
In electroencephalography the
gradient. Thus the electric intensity is equal to the negative of
potential differences created by the
the gradient of potential. The negative sign indicates that the
electrical activity of the brain are used
direction of E is along the decreasing potential.
for diagnosing abnormal behaviour.
The unit of electric intensity from Eq. 12.29 is volt/metre which
is equal to NC 1 as shown below:
volt
1
=
1
joule/coulomb = 1 newton X metre = 1 newton
metre
metre
metre X coulomb coulomb
16
---

Electric Potential at a Point due to a Point
Charge
Let us derive an expression for the potential at a certain point in
the field of a positive point charge q. This can be accomplished
by bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to that point
keeping the charge in equilibrium. The target can be achieved
using Eq. 12.29 in the form AV = -E Ar. provided electric
intensity E remains constant. However in this case E varies
inversely as square of distance from the point charge, it no
B
more remains constant so we use basic principles to compute
the electric potential at a point. The field is radial as shown in
Fig. 12.22.
Let us take two points A and B, infinitesimally close to each
other, so that E remains almost constant between them. The
distance of points A and B from q are r and respectively
Fig. 12.22
and distance of midpoint of space interval between A and B is
r from q. Then according to Fig. 12:22,
(12.30)
Ar=ra-ra
(12.31)
As represents mid point of interval between A and B so
r=[4+TB
(12.32)
Do You Know?
The magnitude of electric intensity at this point is,
(12.33)
As the points A and B are very close then, as a first
approximation, we can take the arithmetic mean to be equal
o geometric mean which gives
Fish and other sea creatures produce
rB
electric fields in a variety of ways.
Sharks have special organs, called
the ampullae of Lorenzini, that are
very sensitive to electric field and can
herefore,
(12.34)
detect potential difference of the
order of nanovolt and can locate their
hus, Eq. 12.33 can be written as
prey very precisely.
(12.35)
Now, if a unit positive charge is moved from B to A, the work
lone is equal to the potential difference between And B,
17
---

V-Vg=E(rg-ra)
(12.36)
Substituting value of from Eq. 12.35,
(12.37)
Do You Know?
(12.38)
To calculate absolute potential or potential at A, point B is
Electrodes connected
assumed to be infinity point so that V=0 and hence
to detection and
recording device
1110
This gives,
(12.39)
ERG (Normal)
The general expression for electric potential V at a distance
A
r from qis,
Potential
(12.40)
difference
Example 12.3: Two opposite point charges, each of
magnitude q are separated by a distance 2d. What is
Time
the electric potential at a point P mid-way between them?
Solution:
ERG (Abnormal)
=0
Potential
difference
So potential at P due to opposite charges is zero.
12.10 ELECTRON VOLT
Time
Referring Fig. 12.21, we know that when a particle of charge
q moves from point A with potential VA A to a point B with
The electrical activity of the retina of the
potential VB keeping electrostatic equilibrium, the change in
eye generates the potential differences
used in electroretinography.
potential energy AU of particlei is,
(12.41)
If no external force acts on the charge to maintain equilibrium,
this change in P.E. appears in the form of change in K.E.
Suppose charge carried by the particle is q = e = 1.6 x 10 th C.
18
---

Thus, in this case, the energy acquired by the charge will be
AK.E=qAV=eAV=(1.6x101C)(AV)
Moreover, assume that AV=1 volt, hence
AK.E=qAV=(1.6x101C)x(1
volt)
AK.E = =(1.6x101h)x(CxV)=1.6x1019J
The amount of energy equal to 1.6 x 10-19 J is called one
electron-volt and is denoted by 1eV. It is defined as "the
amount of energy acquired or lost by an electron as it
traverses a potential difference of one volt". Thus,
(12.42)
Example 12.4: A particle carrying a charge of 2e falls
through a potential difference of 3.0V. Calculate the energy
acquired by it.
Solution:
q=2e
,
AV=3.0V
The energy acquired by the particle is
AK.E=qAV=(2e)(3.0V)=6.0eV
=6.0x1.6x101J=9.6 x 1019
J
12.11 ELECTRIC AND GRAVITATIONAL
FORCES (A COMPARISON)
In chapter 4, we pointed out that gravitational force is a
conservative force, that is, work done in such a field is
independent of path. It can also be proved that Coulomb's
electrostatic force is also conservative force. The electric
force between two charges is similar in form to
the gravitational force between the two point masses,
F=Gmm2 * Both forces vary inversely with the square of the
distance between the two charges or the two masses.
However, the value of gravitational constant G is very small
1
as compared to electrical constant It is because of this
4,
fact that the gravitational force is a very weak force as
compared to electrostatic force. As regards their qualitative
aspect, the electrostatic force could be attractive or repulsive
while, on the other hand, gravitational force is only attractive.
Another difference to be noted is that the electrostatic force is
medium dependant and can be shielded while gravitational
19
---

force lacks this property.
12.12 CHARGE ON AN ELECTRON BY
MILLIKAN'S METHOD
In 1909, R.A Millikan devised a technique that resulted in
precise measurement of the charge on an electron.
A
C
M
+
W,
P
H
S
0
D
W2
V
P'
L
Fig. 12.23 (a)
A schematic diagram of the Millikan oil drop experiment is
shown in Fig. 12.23 (a). Two parallel plates PP' are placed
inside a container C, to avoid disturbances due to air
currents. The separation between the plates is d. The upper
plate P has a small hole H, as shown in the figure. A voltage V
is applied to the plates due to which the electric field E is
setup between the plates. The magnitude of its value is
E = V/d. An atomizer A is used for spraying oil drops into the
container through a nozzle. The oil drop gets charged
F, qE
because of friction between walls of atomizer and oil drops.
These oil drops are very small, and are actually in the form of
mist. Some of these drops happen to pass through the hole in
the upper plate. The space between the plates is illuminated
Oil drop
by the light coming from the source S through the lens L and
window W1. The path of motion of these drops can be
carefully observed by a microscope M.
F, mg
A given droplet between the two plates could be suspended
in air if the gravitational force F = mg acting on the drop is
Fig. 12.23 (b) Oii drop balanced by
the gravitational force and the
equal to the electrical force F, = qE, as shown in Fig. 12.23(b).
Coulombforce
The F. can be adjusted equal to F by adjusting the voltage. In
this case, we can write,
F.=F,
(12.43)
or
qE=mg
If Vis the value of p. d. between the plates for this setting, then
20
---

E=
we may write a
q mgd
(12.44)
In order to determine the mass m of the droplet, the electric
field between the plates is switched off. The droplet falls under the
action of gravity through air. It attains terminal speed V, almost at the
instant the electric field is switched off. Its terminal speed V1 is
determined by timing the fall of the droplet over a measured
distance. Since the drag force F due to air acting upon the droplet
when it is falling with constant terminal speed is equal to its weight.
Hence, using Stokes's law
F F=6nrv,=mg
where r is the radius of the droplet and n is the coefficient of
viscosity for air. If p is the density of the droplet, then
m=
(12.45)
4
Hence.
rv,
3
or
Knowing the value of r, the mass m can be calculated by
using Eq. (12.45). This value of m is substituted in Eq. 12.44
to get the value of charge q on the droplet.
Millikan measured the charge on many drops and found that
each charge was an integral multiple of a minimum value of
charge equal to 1.6 X 10-19 C. He, therefore, concluded that this
minimum value of the charge is the charge on an electron.
Example 12.5: In Millikan oil drop experiment, an oil drop
of mass 4.9 x 10 15 kg is balanced and held stationary by the
electric field between two parallel plates. If the potential
difference between the plates is 750 V and the spacing
between them is 5.0 mm, calculate the charge on the droplet.
Assume g = 9.8 ms2
Solution:
Mass of drop=m=4.9x1015 kg
Potential difference=V=7501
Spacing between plates = mm = 5.0x103m
21
---

For the droplet of the charge q, we have
q - mgd . 4.9 x 10-15 kg x 9.8 ms -2 X 5.0x10-3 m
V
750 V
q= 3.2 X 10 19 C
12.13
CAPACITOR
A capacitor is a device that can store charge. It consists of
+Q
-Q
two conductors placed near one another separated by
vacuum, air or any other insulator, known as dielectric.
Usually the conductors are in the form of parallel plates, and
the capacitor is known as parallel plate capacitor. When the
d
plates of such a capacitor are connected to a battery of
S
voltage V (Fig. 12.24), it establishes a potential difference of
V
V volts between the two plates and the battery places a
Flg 12.24
charge +Q on the plate connected with its positive terminal
and a charge -Q on the other plate, connected to its negative
terminal. let Q be the magnitude of the charge on either of the
plates. It is found that
OC V or = CV or c-v
(12.46)
The proportionality constant C is called the capacitance of
the capacitor. As we shall see later, it depends upon the
geometry of the plates and the medium between them. It is a
measure of the ability of capacitor to store charge. The
capacitance of a capacitor can be defined as the amount of
charge on one plate necessary to raise the potential of that
plate by one volt with respect to the other. The SI unit of
capacitance is coulomb per volt, which because of its
For Your Information
frequent use, is commonly called farad (F), after the famous
One farad is an enormous amount of
English scientist Faraday.
capacitance. For practical purposes
its sub-multiple units are used which
"The capacitance of a capacitor is one farad if a
are given below,
charge of one coulomb, given to one of the plates
1 micro-farad = 1HF = 10 farad
of a parallel plate capacitor, produces a potential
1 pico-farad = 1 PF=10" farad
difference of one volt between them".
12.14 CAPACITANCE OF A PARALLEL
PLATE CAPACITOR
Consider a parallel plate capacitor consisting of two plane
metal plates, each of area A, separated by a distance d as
shown in Fig. 12.24. The distance d is small so that the
electric field E between the plates is uniform and confined
22
---

almost entirely in the region between the plates. Let initially
the medium between the plates be air or vacuum. Then
For Your Information
according to Eq. 12.46,
C-=V
(12.47)
where Q is the charge on the capacitor and V is the potential
difference between the parallel plates. The magnitude E of
electric intensity is related with the distance d by Eq. 12.28 as
E=VI
(12.48)
As Q is the charge on either of the plates of area A. the
surface density of charge on the plates is as
0=01
As already shown in section 12.8, the electric intensity
The electric field lines between the
plates of a parallel-plate capacitor.
between oppositely charged plates is given by E== Eg
two
Small bits of thread are suspended in
oil and become aligned with the
Substituting the value of O, we have
electric field. Note that the lines are
equally spaced, indicating that the
electric field there is uniform.
(12.49)
Ag
It gives
(12.50)
If an insulating material, called dielectric, of relative
permittivity E, is introduced between the plates, the
capacitance of capacitor is enhanced by the factor E,.
V.
Capacitors commonly have some dielectric medium, thereby
E, is also called as dielectric constant.
(a)
Following experiment gives the effect of insertion of dielectric
between the plates of a capacitor.
Consider a charged capacitor whose plates are connected to
a voltmeter (Fig. 12.25 a). The deflection of the meter is a
measure of the potential difference between the plates.
When a dielectric material is inserted between the plates,
V
reading drops indicating a decrease in the potential
difference between the plates (Fig. 12.25 b). From the
definition, C = Q/V, since V decreases while Q remains
(b)
constant, the value of C increases. Then Eq. 12.50 becomes,
V< V.
c__-Asge,
(12.51)
Fig. 12.25 Effect of a dielectric on the
capacitance of a capacitor.
23
---

Eq. 12.50 shows the dependence of a capacitor upon the
area of plates, the separation between the plates and
medium between them.
Dividing Eq. 12.51 by Eq.12.50 we get expression for
dielectric constant as,
E, = Groud
(12.52)
vac
From Eq. 12.52 dielectric co-efficient or dielectric constant is
For Your Information
defined as
"The ratio of the capacitance of a parallel plate
capacitor with an insulating substance as
medium between the plates to its capacitance
with vacuum (or air) as medium between them".
12.15 ELECTRIC POLARIZATION OF
DIELECTRICS
A collection of capacitors used in
The increase in the capacity of a capacitor due to presence of
various appliances.
dielectric is due to electric polarization of dielectric.
The dielectric consists of atoms and molecules which are
electrically neutral on the average, i.e, they contain equal
amounts of negative and positive charges. The distribution of
these charges in the atoms and molecules is such that the
centre of the positive charge coincides with the centre of
negative charge. When the molecules of dielectric are
subjected to an electric field between the plates of a
capacitor, the negative charges (electrons) are attracted
towards the positively charged plate of the capacitor and the
positive charges (nuclei) towards the negatively charged
plate. The electrons in the dielectric (insulator) are not free to
move but it is possible that the electrons and nuclei can
undergo slight displacement when subjected to an electric
field. As a result of this displacement the centre of positive
and negative charges now no longer coincide with each other
and one end of molecules shows a negative charge and the
other end, an equal amount of positive charge but the
molecule as a whole is still neutral. Two equal and opposite
charges separated by a small distance are said to constitute
a dipole. Thus the molecules of the dielectric under the action
of electric field become dipoles and the dielectric is said to be
polarized.
The effect of the polarization of dielectric is shown in
24
---

Fig. 12.26. The positively charged plate attracts the negative
end of the molecular dipoles and the negatively charged plate
attracts the positive end. Thus the surface of the dielectric
which is in contact with the positively charged plate places a
H
layer of negative charges on the plate. Similarly the surface of
#
the dielectric in contact with the negatively charged plate
places a layer of positive charges. It effectively decreases the
#
surface density of the charge o on the plates. As the electric
intensity E between the plates is so E decreases due to
so
polarization of the dielectric. This results into a decrease of
potential difference between the plates due to presence of
Fig. 12.26
dielectric as demonstrated by the experiment described in the
previous section.
12.16 ENERGY STORED IN ACAPACITOR
A capacitor is a device to store charge. Alternatively, it is
possible to think of a capacitor as a device for storing
electrical energy. After all, the charge on the plate possesses
electrical potential energy which arises because work is to be
done to deposit charge on the plates. This is due to the fact
that with each small increment of charge being deposited
during the charging process, the potential difference
between the plates increases, and a larger amount of work is
needed to bring up next increment of charge.
Initially when the capacitor is uncharged, the potential
difference between plates is zero and finally it becomes V
when q charge is deposited on each plate. Thus, the average
potential difference is 0+V-1V +
2
2
Therefore
P.E.=Energy=1qv =
Using the relation q = CVfor capacitor we get
Energy = 1/2 CV2
(12.53)
It is also possible to regard the energy as being stored in
electric field between the plates, rather than the potential
energy of the charges on the plates. Such a view point is
useful when electric field strength between the plates instead
of charges on the plates causing field is to be considered.
This relation can be obtained by substituting V = Ed and
C = Ae,e/d in Eq. 12.53,
25
---

R
+q
-q
=
C
= 2 1 (Ad)
B
S
.
A
As (Ad) is volume between the plates so
(12.54)
V.
Volume
This equation is valid for any electric field strength.
Flg 12.27 Charging a capacitor
12.17 CHARGING AND DISCHARGING A
CAPACITOR
q
Cv,=q
Many electric circuits consist of both capacitors and
resistors. Fig. 12.27 shows a resistor-capacitor circuit called
R-C-circuit. When the switch S is set at terminal A, the R-C
0.63q,
combination is connected to a battery of voltage Vo which
Large RC
starts charging the capacitor through the resistor R.
Small! RC
The capacitor is not charged immediately, rather charges
RC
L.
build up gradually to the equilibrium value of q. = CV. The
Fig. 12.28
growth of charge with time for different resistances is shown
in Fig. 12.28. According to this graph a = 0 at t = 0 and
R
+q
-q
increases gradually with time till it reaches its equilibrium
value q. = CV. a* The voltage V across capacitor at any instant
C
can be obtained by dividing q by C, as V = q/C.
How fast or how slow the capacitor is charging or
S
B
discharging, depends upon the product of the resistance R
A
o
and the capacitance C used in the circuit. As the unit of
product RC is that of time, so this product is known as time
constant and is defined as the time required by the capacitor
to deposit 0.63 times the equilibrium charge 90. The graphs of
(a)
Fig.12.28 show that the charge reaches its equilibrium value
a
sooner when the time constant is small.
CV.
Fig. 12.29(a) illustrates the discharging of a capacitor
through a resistor. In this figure, the switch S is set at point B,
Large RC
so the charge +q on the left plate can flow anti-clockwise
through the resistance and neutralize the charge -q on the
Small RC
right plate.
The graphs in Fig. 12.29(b) shows that discharging begins at
t=0 when q = CV, and decreases gradually to zero. Smaller
(b)
t
values of time constant RC lead to a more rapid discharge.
Fig. 12.29 Discharging a capacitor
26
---

Example 12.6: The time constant of a series RC circuit is
t= RC. Verify that an ohm times farad is equivalent to second.
Solution: Ohm's law in terms of potential difference V,
current I and resistance R can be written as,
V=IR
Putting I = q/t, this equation transforms into the equation,
Interesting Application
v=4R
The charging/discharging of a
capacitor enables some windshield
wipers of cars to be used
intermittently during a light drizzle. In
or
R=Vxt
this mode of operation the wipers
remain off for a while and then turn on
briefly. The timing of the on-off cycle is
According to equation nq=CV,C=qN
determined by the time constant of a
resistor-capacitor combination.
Multiplying this equation with above equation gives,
RC=
Hence
1 ohm X 1 farad = 1 second
where ohm is the unit of resistance R.
SUMMARY
The Coulomb's law states that the force between two point charges is directly
proportional to the product of the magnitudes of charges and inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them.
Electric field force per unit charge at a point is called electric field strength or electric
field intensity at that point.
The number of the field lines passing through a certain element of area is known as
electric flux through that area, denoted by O.
The electric flux 0 through a vector area A, in the electric field of intensity E is given by
0 = E.A = EA cos0 where 0 is the angle between the field lines and the normal to
surface area.
Gauss's law is stated as "the flux through any closed surface is 1/eg times the total
charge enclosed in it.
The interior of a hollow charged metal sphere is a field free region.
The electric intensity between two oppositely charged parallel plates is E=2
The amount of work done in bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to a point
against electric field is the electric potential at that point.
27
---

Capacitance of a capacitor is a measure of the ability of a capacitor to store charge.
The
capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor is
The increase in the capacitance of a capacitor due to presence of dielectric is due to
electric polarization of the dielectric.
QUESTIONS
12.1
The potential is constant throughout a given region of space. Is the electrical field
zero or non-zero in this region? Explain.
12.2
Suppose that you follow an electric field line due to a positive point charge. Do
electric field and the potential increase or decrease?
12.3
How can you identify that which plate of a capacitor is positively charged?
12.4
Describe the force or forces on a positive point charge when placed between parallel
plates
(a)
with similar and equal charges
(b)
with opposite and equal charges
12.5
Electric lines of force never cross. Why?
12.6
If a point charge q of mass m is released in a non-uniform electric field with field lines
pointing in the same direction, will it make a rectilinear motion?
12.7
Is E necessarily zero inside a charged rubber balloon if balloon is spherical? Assume
that charge is distributed uniformly over the surface.
12,8
Is it true that Gauss's law states that the total number of lines of forces crossing any
closed surface in the outward direction is proportional to the net positive charge
enclosed within surface?
12.9
Do electrons tend to go to region of high potential or of low potential?
PROBLEMS
12.1
Compare magnitudes of electrical and gravitational forces exerted on an object
(mass = 10.0 g, charge = 20.0 uC) by an identical object that is placed 10.0 cm from
the first. = 6.67x10*" Nm2kg2
(Ans: Fo = 5.4 x 10")
28
---

12.2 Calculate vectorially the net electrostatic force on q as shown in the figure.
q=4.0uc
10 0.60m
0,60 m
07
(Ans: F=0.058 iN)
a = 1.0uc
-1.0
12.3
A point charge q = 8.0 x 10 C is placed at the origin. Calculate electric field at a
point 2.0 m from the origin on the z-axis.
[Ans: (-1.8x102 k)NC*
12.4
Determine the electric field at the position r = (4i+3) caused by a point charge
q = 5.0 X 10° C placed at origin. [Ans: (1440) + 1080 )N C ]
12.5
Two point charges, q, = -1.0 x 10 6 C and q2 = 4.0 x 10 * C, are separated by a
distance of 3.0 m. Find and justify the zero-field location. (Ans: 3.0 m)
12.6
Find the electric field strength required to hold suspended a particle of mass
1.0 x10 kg and charge 1.0uc between two plates 10.0 cm apart. (Ans: 9.8 vm")
12.7
A particle having a charge of 20 electrons on it falls through a potential difference of
100 volts. Calculate the energy acquired by it in electron volts (eV) [Ans: (2.0x10'eV)]
12.8
In Millikan's experiment, oil droplets are introduced into the space between two flat
horizontal plates, 5.00 mm apart. The plate voltage is adjusted to exactly 780V so
that the droplet is held stationary. The plate voltage is switched off and the selected
droplet is observed to fall a measured distance of 1.50 mm in 11.2 S. Given that the
density of the oil used is 900 kg m3, and the viscosity of air at laboratory temperature
is 1.80x105 Nm S, calculate
a)
The mass, and
b)
The charge on thedroplet(Assumeg=9.8ms
[Ans: (a) 5.14x10115 kg, (b) 3.20 x 10 ¹9 C]
12.9
A proton placed in a uniform electric field of 5000 NC1 directed to right is allowed to
go a distance of 10.0 cm from A to B. Calculate
(a)
Potential difference between the two points
(b)
Work done by the field
(c)
The change in P.E. of proton
(d)
The change in K.E. of the proton
(e)
Its velocity
(mass of proton is 1.67x102kkg)
(Ans: -500 V, 500 eV, -500 eV, 500 eV, 3.097 X 10° ms*)
12.10 Using zero reference point at infinity, determine the amount by which a point charge
of 4.0 x 10 C alters the electric potential at a point 1.2 m away, when
(a)
Charge is positive
(b)
Charge is negative
(Ans: +3.0 X 102 V, -3.0x102 V)
29
---

12.11 In Bohr's atomic model of hydrogen atom, the electron is in an orbit around the
nuclear proton at a distance of 5.29 X 10 m with a speed of 2.18 X 108 ms1.
(e = 1.60x10-18 C, mass of electron = 9.10x10 kg). Find
(a)
The electric potential that a proton exerts at this distance
(b)
Total energy of the atom in eV
(c)
The ionization energy for the atom in eV
(Ans: +27.20 V, -13.6 eV, +13.60 eV)
12.12 The electronic flash attachment for a camera contains a capacitor for storing the
energy used to produce the flash. In one such unit, the potential difference between
the plates of a 750 uF capacitor is 330 V. Determine the energy that is used to
produce the flash.
(Ans: 40.8J)
12.13 A capacitor has a capacitance of 2.5x10 F. In the charging process, electrons are
removed from one plate and placed on the other one. When the potential difference
between the plates is 450 V, how many electrons have been transferred?
(e =1.60x101°C)
(Ans: 7.0x1013 electrons)
30
---