
Chapter 13
CURRENT ELECTRICITY
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1
Understand the concept of steady current.
2.
Describe some sources of current.
3.
Recognize effects of current.
4.
Understand and describe Ohm's law.
5.
Sketch and explain the current-voltage characteristics of a metallic conductor at
constant temperature, diode and filament lamp.
6.
Understand resistivity and explain its dependence upon temperature.
7
Understand and elaborate conductance and conductivity of conductor.
8.
Solve problems relating the variation of resistance with temperature for one
dimension current flow.
9.
Know the value of resistance by reading colour code on it.
10.
Know the working and use of rheostat in the potential divider circuit.
11.
Describe the characteristics of thermistor.
12.
Use the energy considerations to distinguish between emf and p.d.
13.
Understand the internal resistance of sources and its consequences for external
circuits.
14.
Describe the conditions for maximum power transfer.
15.
Know and use the application, of Kirchhoff's first law as conservation of charge.
16.
Know and use the application of Kirchhoff's second law as conservation of energy.
17.
Describe the function of Wheatstone Bridge to measure the unknown resistance.
18.
Describe the function of potentiometer to measure and compare potentials without
drawing any current from the circuit.
M
lost practical applications of electricity involve charges in motion or the electric current.
Alight bulb glows due to the flow of electric current. The current that flows through the coil of
a motor causes its shaft to rotate. Most of the devices in the industry and in our homes
31
---

necessity of our life.
13.1 ELECTRIC CURRENT
An electric current is caused by the motion of electric charge.
If a net charge AQ passes through any cross section of a
conductor in time At, we say that an electric current I has
been established through the conductor where
(13.1)
The SI unit of current is ampere and it is a current due to flow
of charge at the rate of one coulomb per second.
Motion of electric charge which causes an electric current is
due to the flow of charge carriers. In case of metallic
conductors, the charge carriers are electrons. The charge
carriers in electrolyte are positive and negative ions e.g., in a
CuSO4 solution the charge carriers are Cu" and so, ions.
In gases, the charge carriers are electrons and ions.
Current Direction
Interesting Information
Early scientists regarded an electric current as a flow of
positive charge from positive to negative terminal of the
battery through an external circuit. Later on, it was found that
a current in metallic conductors is actually due to the flow of
negative charge carriers called electrons moving in the
opposite direction i.e., from negative to positive terminal of
the battery, but it is a convention to take the direction of
current as the direction in which positive charges flow. This
When eel senses danger, it turns
current is referred as conventional current. The reason is that
itself into a living battery. Any one who
it has been found experimentally that positive charge moving
attacks this fish is likely to get a
shock The potential difference
in one direction is equivalent in all external effects to a
between the head and tall of an
negative charge moving in the opposite direction. As the
electric eel can be up to 600 V.
current is measured by its external effects so a current due to
motion of negative charges, after reversing its direction of
flow can be substituted by an equivalent current due to flow of
positive charges. Thus
The conventional current in a circuit is defined as
that equivalent current which passes from a point at
higher potential to a point at a lower potential as if it
represented a movement of positive charges.
While analyzing the electric circuit, we use the direction of the
current according to the above mentioned convention.
32
---

If we wish to refer to the motion of electrons, we use the term
Electron flow
electronic current (Fig. 13.1).
Connecting
Current Through a Metallic Conductor
wire
In a metal, the valence electrons are not attached to
Current
Metal
individual atoms but are free to move about within the body.
These electrons are known as free electrons. The free
Cell
electrons are in random motion just like the molecules of a
gas in a container and they act as charge carriers in metals.
Current
The speed of randomly moving electrons depends upon
temperature.
Electron
If we consider any section of metallic wire, the rate at which
Electron flow
the free electrons pass through it from right to left is the same
Fig. 13.1
as the rate at which they pass from left to right (Fig. 13.2 a).
As a result the current through the wire is zero. If the ends of
the wire are connected to a battery, an electric field E will be
set up at every point within the wire (Fig. 13.2 b). The free
Free electron
Atom
electrons will now experience a force in the direction opposite
to E.As a result of this force the free electrons acquire a
motion in the direction of -E. It may be noted that the force
experienced by the free electrons does not produce a net
acceleration because the electrons keep on colliding with the
atoms of the conductor. The overall effect of these collisions
is to transfer the energy of accelerating electrons to the lattice
with the result that the electrons acquire an average velocity,
(a)
called the drift velocity in the direction of -E (Fig. 13.2 b). The
drift velocity is of the order of 10 'ms', whereas the velocity of
free electrons at room temperature due to their thermal
E
motion is several hundred kilometres per second.
Thus, when an electric field is established in a conductor, the
free electrons modify their random motion in such a way that
they drift slowly in a direction opposite to the field. In other
words the electrons, in addition to their violent thermal
motion, acquire a constant drift velocity due to which a net
directed motion of charges takes place along the wire and a
current begins to flow through it. A steady current is
+1
established in a wire when a constant potential difference is
maintained across it which generates the requisite electric
(b)
field E along the wire.
Fig. 13.2
Example 13.1: 1.0 X 10 electrons pass through a
conductor in 1.0 us. Find the current in ampere flowing
through the conductor. Electronic charge is 1.6x1019 C.
Solution:
Number of electrons = =1.0x10
33
---

Charge on an electron = e = 1.6x1019 C
Time=At=1.0us
Current/through the conductor is given by
1.0x107
I=
Cs
=
1.6x10-6,
A
1.0 x 10 6 S
13.2 SOURCE OF CURRENT
When two conductors at different potentials are joined by a
metallic wire, current will flow through the wire. The current
continues to flow from higher potential to the lower potential
Fig. 12.3 Conventional current flows
until both are at the same potential (Fig. 13.3). After this the
from higher to lower potential through
current ceases to flow. Thus the current through the wire
a wire.
decreases from a maximum value to zero. In order to have a
constant current the potential difference across the conductors
or the ends of the wire should be maintained constant. This is
"
achieved by connecting the ends of the wire to the terminals of
Current
Electrons
a device called a source of current (Fig. 13.4).
Every source of current converts some non electrical energy
such as chemical, mechanical, heat or solar energy into
electrical energy. There are many types of sources of current.
Afew examples are mentioned below:
(i)
Cells (primary as well as secondary) which convert
chemical energy into electrical energy.
Fig. 13.4 A source of current such as
battery maintains a nearly constant
(ii)
Electric generators which convert mechanical energy
potential difference between ends of a
into electrical energy.
conductor.
(iii)
Thermo-couples which convert heat energy into
electrical energy.
For Your Information
(iv)
Solar cells which convert sunlight directly into
electrical energy.
13.3 EFFECTS OF CURRENT
The presence of electric current can be detected by the
various effects which it produces. The obvious effects of the
current are:
(i)
Heating effect
(ii)
Magnetic effect
Heating effect of current is used in
electric kettle.
(iii)
Chemical effect
34
---

Heating Effect
Current flows through a metallic wire due to motion of free
electrons. During the course of their motion, they collide
frequently with the atoms of the metal. At each collision, they
lose some of their kinetic energy and give it to atoms with
which they collide. Thus as the current flows through the wire,
it increases the kinetic energy of the vibrations of the metal
atoms. i.e., it generates heat in the wire. It is found that the
heat H produced by a current I in the wire of resistance R
during a time interval is given by
=12R
(a)
The heating effect of current is utilized in electric heaters,
kettles, toasters and electric irons etc.
Magnetic Effect
The passage of current is always accompanied by a
magnetic field in the surrounding space. The strength of the
field depends upon the value of current and the distance from
the current element. The pattern of the field produced by a
(b))
current carrying straight wire, a coil and a solenoid is shown
in Fig. 13.5 (a, b & c). Magnetic effect is utilized in the
detection and measurement of current. All the machines
involving electric motors also use the magnetic effect of
current.
Chemical Effect
Solenoid
Certain liquids such as dilute sulphuric acid or copper
sulphate solution conduct electricity due to some chemical
(c)
reactions that take place within them. The study of this process
Fig. 13.5
is known as electrolysis. The chemical changes produced
during the electrolysis of a liquid are due to chemical effects of
the current. It depends upon the nature of the liquid and the
quantity of electricity passed through the liquid.
The liquid which conducts current is known as electrolyte. The
material in the form of wire or rod or plate which leads the
current into or out of the electrolyte is known as electrode. The
electrode connected with the positive terminal of the current
source is called anode and that connected with negative
terminal is known as cathode. The vessel containing the two
electrodes and the liquid is known as voltameter. As an
example we will consider the electrolysis of copper sulphate
solution. The voltameter contains dilute solution of copper
sulphate. The anode and cathode are both copper plates
35
---

(Fig. 13.6). When copper sulphate is dissolved in water, it
dissociates into Cu" and SO 4 ions. On passing current
A
through the voltameter. Cu" moves towards the cathode and
the following reaction takes place.
Cu" + 2e
Cu
The copper atoms thus formed are deposited at cathode
Cu
Cu
plate. While copper is being deposited at the cathode, the
SO ions move towards the anode. Copper atoms from the
anode go into the solution as copper ions which combine with
sulphate ions to form copper sulphate.
Cu" + SO
CuSO
Fig.13.6
As the electrolysis proceeds, copper is continuously
deposited on the cathode-while an equal amount of copper
from the anode is dissolved into the solution and the
density of copper sulphate solution remains unaltered
This example also illustrates the basic principle of
electroplating - a process of coating a thin layer of some
expensive metal (gold, silver etc.) on an article of some
cheap metal.
13.4 OHM'SLAW
We have seen that when a battery is connected across a
conductor, an electric current begins to flow through it. How
much current flows through the conductor when a certain
potential difference is set up across its ends? The answer to
this question was given by a German Physicist George
Simon Ohm. He showed by elaborate experiments that the
current through a metallic conductor is directly proportional to
the potential difference across its ends. This fact is known as
Ohms' law which states that
"The current flowing through a conductor is directly
proportional to the potential difference across its
ends provided the physical state such as temperature
etc. of the conductor remains constant".
Symbolically Ohm's law can be written as
/ x V
It implies that
V=RI
(13.2)
where R, the constant of proportionality is called the
resistance of the conductor. The value of the resistance
depends upon the nature, dimensions and the physical state
of the conductor. In fact the resistance is a measure of the
36
---

opposition to the motion of electrons due to their continuous
bumping with the atoms of the lattice. The unit of resistance is
ohm. A conductor has a resistance of 1 ohm if a current of
1
ampere flows through it when a potential difference of 1 volt is
applied across its ends. The symbol of ohm is Q. If / is measured
in amperes, Vi in volts, then R is measured in ohms i.e.,
R(ohms)=
(volts)
(13.3)
A sample of a conductor is said to obey Ohm's law if its
resistance R remains constant that is, the graph of its
V versus / is exactly a straight line (Fig. 13.7). A conductor
which strictly obeys Ohm's law is called ohmic. However,
o
V
there are devices, which do not obey Ohms' law i.e., they are
Fig. 13.7 Current - voltage graph of
non ohmic. The examples of non ohmic devices are filament
an ohmic material.
bulbs and semiconductor diodes.
Let us apply a certain potential difference across the
terminals of a filament lamp and measure the resulting
current passing through it. If we repeat the measurement for
different values of potential difference and draw a graph of
voltage V versus current I, it will be seen that the graph is not a
straight line (Fig. 13.8). It means that a filament is a non
ohmic device. This deviation of I - Vgraph from straight line is
due to the increase in the resistance of the filament with
temperature - a topic which is discussed in the next section.
o
V
As the current passing through the filament is increased from
Fig.13.8
zero, the graph is a straight line in the initial stage because
the change in the resistance of the filament with temperature
due to small current is not appreciable. As the current is
further increased, the resistance of the filament continues to
increase due to rise in its temperature.
Another example of non ohmic device is a semiconductor
diode. The current - voltage plot of such a diode is shown in
Fig. 13.9. The graph is not a straight line so semi conductor is
also a non ohmic device.
V
Review of Series and Parallel Combinations of Resistors
In an electrical circuit, usually, a number of resistors are
Fig.13.9
connected together. There are two arrangements in which
resistors can be connected with each other ** one is known as
series arrangement and other one as parallel arrangement.
R.
R2
R,
If the resistors are connected end to end such that the same
current passes through all of them, they are said to be
R, = R. +
connected in series as shown in Fig. 13.10(a). There
1.13.10(a)
37
---

equivalent resistance R is given by
R,
R.=R,+R2+R,+ ......
(13.4)
R3
In parallel arrangement a number of resistors are
.
R3
connected side by side with their ends joined together at
two common points as shown. in Fig. 13.10(b). The
equivalent resistance Re of this arrangement is given by
R,=R,+R,+R,
1.1.1.1 + +
(13.5)
Fig. 13.10 (b)
Re R1 R2 R3
13.5 RESISTIVITY AND ITS DEPENDENCE
UPON TEMPERATURE
It has been experimentally seen that the resistance R of a
wire is directly proportional to its length L and inversely
proportional to its cross sectional area A. Expressing
mathematically we have
Rx
1/4
A
or
R=P1A
(13.6)
where p is a constant of proportionality known as resistivity of
specific resistance of the material of the wire. It may be noted
that resistance is the characteristic of a particular wire
whereas the resistivity is the property of the material of which
the wire is made. From Eq. 13.6 we have
p=RA
RA
(13.7)
The above equation gives the definition of resistivity as the
resistance of a metre cube of a material. The SI unit of
resistivity is ohm-metre (Qm).
Conductance is another quantity used to describe the
electrical properties of materials. In fact conductance is the
reciprocal of resistance i.e.,
Conductance
Conductance - resistance(R)
=
resistance
The SI unit of conductance is mho or siemen.
Likewise conductivity, o is the reciprocal of resistivity i.e.,
1
a
(13.8)
p
38
---

The SI unit of conductivity is ohm'm or mh m". Resistivity of
Table 13.1
various materials are given in Table 13.1.
Substance
(5m)
(KT)
It may be noted from Table 13.1 that silver and copper are two
best conductors. That is the reason that most electric wires
Silver
1.52 x 10 *
0.00380
are made of copper.
Copper
1.54 * 10*
0.00390
The resistivity of a substance depends upon the temperature
Gold
2,27 x Y 10
0.00340
also. It can be explained by recalling that the resistance
Aluminium
2.63 * 10 6
0.00390
offered by a conductor to the flow of electric current is due to
collisions, which the free electrons encounter with atoms of
Tungsten
5.00 x 10
0.00460
the lattice. As the temperature of the conductor rises, the
Iron
11.00 x 10
0.00520
amplitude of vibration of the atoms in the lattice increases
Platinum
11.00 x 10 5
0.00520
and hence, the probability of their collision with free electrons
also increases. One may say that the atoms then offer a
Constanton
49.00 x 10 s
0.00001
bigger target, that is, the collision cross-section of the atoms
Mercury
94.00 x 10th
0.00091
increases with temperature. This makes the collisions
Nichrome
100.0  0
0.00020
between free electrons and the atoms in the lattice more
frequent and hence, the resistance of the conductor
Carbon
3.5* 10"
-0.0005
increases.
Germanium
0.5
-0.05
Experimentally the change in resistance of a metallic
Silicon
20-2300
-0.07
conductor with temperature is found to be nearly linear over a
considerable range of temperature above and below 0 °C
(Fig. 13.11). Over such a range the fractional change in
resistance per kelvin is known as the temperature coefficient
of resistance i.e.,
R R
(13.9)
where R and R,are resistances at temperature 0°C and t°C.
As resistivity p depends upon the temperature, Eq. 13.6 gives
R==PLIA and R.=p.LIA
Substituting the values of R, and Rg in Eq. 13.9, we get
200
0
200
400
600
as
a = P1-Po pot
T (C)
(13.10)
Fig. 13.11 Variation of resistivity of Cu
where Pg is the resistivity of a conductor at 0 °C and P1 is the
with temperature.
resistivity at t °C. Values of temperature co-efficients of
resistivity of some substances are also listed in Table 13.1.
Interesting Information
There are some substances like germanium, silicon etc.,
whose resistance decreases with increase in temperature.
Inspectors can easily check the
reliability of a concrete bridge made
i.e., these substances have negative temperature coefficients.
with carbon fibers, The fibers conduct
electricity. If sensors show that
Example 13.2: 0.75 A current flows through an iron wire
electrical resistance is increasing
when a battery of 1.5 V is connected across its ends. The
over time the fibers are separating
because of cracks.
39
---

length of the wire is 5.0 m and its cross sectional area is
2.5x 10 m². Compute the resistivity of iron.
Solution:
Table 13.2 The Colour Code
The resistance R of the wire can be calculated by Eq. 13.2
Colour
Value
i.e.,
Black
0
R
Brown
1
The resistivity p of iron of which the wire is made is given by
Red
2
Orange
3
p = Qm
Yellow
4
Example 13.3: A platinum wire has resistance of 10 a at
Green
5
0°C and 20 a at 273 °C. Find the value of temperature
coefficient of resistance of platinum.
Blue
6
Solution:
Violet
7
Gray
8
Ro = 100, R,=200,t=546K-273K=273K
White
9
Temperature coefficient of resistance can be found by
a = -
Ro
t
10 S x 2 273 K
273K
13.6 COLOUR CODE FOR CARBON
RESISTANCES
Carbon resistors are most common in electronic equipment. They
consist of a high-grade ceramic rod or cone (called the substrate)
on which is deposited a thin resistive film of carbon. The numerical
1st digit
Tolerance
value of their resistance is indicated by a colour code which
Gold t 5%
2nd digit
consists of bands of different colours printed on the body of the
Silver 10%
resistor. The colour used in this code and the digits represented by
No. of Os
them are given in Table 13.2.
Resistor Colour Code
Usually the code consists of four bands (Fig. 13.12). Starting
Fig. 13.12
from left to right, the colour bands are interpreted as follows:
For Your Information
1.
The first band indicates the first digit in the numerical
value of the resistance.
2.
The second band gives the second digit.
3.
The third band is decimal multiplier i.e., it gives the
number of zeros after the first two digits.
Red
Violet
Orange
Silver
4.
The fourth band gives resistance tolerance. Its colour
2
7
000
10%
is either silver or gold. Silver band indicates a
tolerance of + 10%, a gold band shows a tolerance of
R = 27000 (+ 10%)
40
---

+ 5 % If there is no fourth band, tolerance is
understood to be + 20% By tolerance, we mean the
possible variation from the marked value. For
example, a 1000 a resistor with a tolerance of + 10%
will have an actual resistance anywhere between
9000 and 1100 Q.
Rheostat
It is a wire wound variable resistance. It consists of a bare
Sliding contact
manganin wire wound over an insulating cylinder. The ends
C
of the wire are connected to two fixed terminals A and B
(Fig. 13.13 a). A third terminal C is attached to a sliding
A
B
contact which can also be moved over the wire.
Resistance wire
A rheostat can be used as a variable resistor as well as a
(a) A Rheostat
potential divider. To use it as a variable resistor one of the
C
fixed terminal say A and the sliding terminal C are inserted in
the circuit (Fig. 13.13 b). In this way the resistance of the wire
A
B
between A and the sliding contact C is used. If the sliding
contact is shifted away from the terminal A, the length and
(b) Its use as variable resistor
hence the resistance included in the circuit increases and if
the sliding contact is moved towards A, the resistance
Fig. 13.13
decreases. A rheostat can also be used as a potential divider.
This is illustrated in Fig. 13.14. A potential difference V is
applied across the ends A and B of the rheostat with the help
of a battery. If R is the resistance of wire AB, the current /
passing through it is given by I = V/R.
The potential difference between the portion BC of the wire
AB is given by
current X resistance
Vxr=[v V =
(13.11)
A
R
R
where r is the resistance of the portion BC of the wire. The
circuit shown in Fig. 13.14 is known as potential divider.
C
Eq.13.11 shows that this circuit can provide at its output
R
terminals a potential difference varying from zero to the full
r
potential difference of the battery depending on the position of
VSC
the sliding contact. As the sliding contact C is moved towards
B
the end B, the length and hence the resistance r of the portion
BC of the wire decreases which according to Eq. 13.11,
decreases VBC On the other hand if the sliding contact C is
Use of rheostat as potential divider
moved towards the end A, the output voltage VBC increases.
Fig.13.14
41
---

6%
Thermistors
A thermistor is a heat sensitive resistor. Most thermistors
have negative temperature coefficient of resistance i.e., the
resistance of such thermistors decreases when their
temperature is increased. Thermistors with positive
temperature coefficient are also available.
Thermistors are made by heating under high pressure
semiconductor ceramic made from mixtures of metallic
oxides of manganese, nickel, cobalt, copper, iron etc. These
are pressed into desired shapes and then baked at high
temperature. Different types of thermistors are shown in
Fig. 13.15 Thermistors of different
Fig.13.15. They may be in the form of beads, rods or washers.
shapes.
Thermistors with high negative temperature coefficient are
very accurate for measuring low temperatures especially
near 10 K. The higher resistance at low temperature enables
more accurate measurement possible.
For Your infor about
Thermistors have wide applications as temperature sensors
i.e., they convert changes of temperature into electrical
A zero-ohm resistor is indicated by a
single black colour band around the
voltage which is duly processed.
body of the resistor.
13.7 ELECTRICAL POWER AND POWER
DISSIPATION IN RESISTORS
Consider a circuit consisting of a battery E connected in
series with a resistance R (Fig. 13.16). A steady current I
A
flows through the circuit and a steady potential difference V
exists between the terminals A and B of the resistor R.
Terminal A, connected to the positive pole of the battery, is at
a higher potential than the terminal B. In this circuit the
battery is continuously lifting charge uphill through the
potential difference V. Using the meaning of potential
difference, the work done in moving a charge AQ up through
the potential difference Vis given by
Workdone=AW=VxAQ
(13.12)
This is the energy supplied by the battery. The rate at which
B
the battery is supplying electrical energy is the power output
or electrical power of the battery. Using the definition of
Fig. 13.16 The power of a battery
appears as the power dissipated in
power we have
the resistor R.
Electrical power = Energy supplied =v4Q
Time
taken
At
42
---

Since
I = AQ , so
At
Electrical power VxI
(13.12a)
Eg. 3.12a is a general relation for power delivered from a
source of current I operating on a voltage V. In the circuit
shown in Fig. 13.16 the power supplied by the battery is
expended or dissipated in the resistor R. The principle of
conservation of energy tells us that the power dissipated in
the resistor is also given by Eq. 13.12.a
Power dissipated (P) )=Vxl
(13.13)
Alternative equation for calculating power can be found by
substituting V=1R, 1 = V/R in turn in Eq. 13.13
P=Vx/=IRx1=1'R
R R
Thus we have three equations for calculating the power
dissipated in a resistor.
P=Vxl, P=12R, P=V2
(13.14)
If V is expressed in volts and /in amperes, the power is
expressed in watts.
13.8 ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE (EMF) AND
POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
We know that a source of electrical energy, say a cell or a
battery, when connected across a resistance maintains a
steady current through it (Fig. 13.17). The cell continuously
E
supplies energy which is dissipated in the resistance of the
R
circuit. Suppose when a steady current has been established
in the circuit, a charge AQ passes through any cross section
of the circuit in time At. During the course of motion, this
charge enters the cell at its low potential end and leaves at its
high potential end. The source must supply energy AWto the
Fig. 13.17 Electromotive force of a
positive charge to force it to go to the point of high potential.
cell.
The emf E of the source is defined as the energy supplied to
unit charge by the cell.
i.e
E AW AQ
(13.15)
43
---

It may be noted that electromotive force is not a force and we
do not measure it in newtons. The unit of emf is
joule/coulomb which is volt (V).
The energy supplied by the cell to the charge carriers is
derived from the conversion of chemical energy into
electrical energy inside the cell.
Like other components in a circuit a cell also offers some
resistance. This resistance is due to the electrolyte present
between the two electrodes of the cell and is called the
internal resistance r of the cell. Thus a cell of emf E having an
internal resistance r is equivalent to a source of pure emf E
with a resistance rin series as shown in Fig. 13.18.
Fig. 13.18 An equivalent circuit of a
Let us consider the performance of a cell of emf E and
cell of emf E and internal resistance r.
internal resistance r as shown in Fig. 13.19. A voltmeter of
infinite resistance measures the potential difference across
the external resistance R or the potential difference V across
the terminals of the cell. The current I flowing through the
circuit is given by
R+r
or
E=IR+1r
(13.16)
Here I R = V is the terminal potential difference of the cell in
the presence of current I. When the switch S is open, no
si
current passes through the resistance. In this case the
R
voltmeter reads the emf E as terminal voltage. Thus terminal
voltage in the presence of the current (switch on) would be
less than the emf Eby Ir.
Fig. 13.19 The terminal potential
difference Vof a cellis
Let us interpret the Eq. 13.16 on energy considerations. The
left side of this equation is the emf E of the cell which is equal
to energy gained by unit charge as it passes through the cell
from its negative to positive terminal. The right side of the
equation gives an account of the utilization of this energy as
the current passes the circuit. It states that, as a unit charge
passes through the circuit, a part of this energy equal to I r is
dissipated into the cell and the rest of the energy is dissipated
into the external resistance R. It is given by potential drop IR.
Thus the emf gives the energy supplied to unit charge by the
cell and the potential drop across the various elements
account for the dissipation of this energy into other forms as
the unit charge passes through these elements.
The emf is the "cause" and potential difference is its "effect".
The emf is always present even when no current is drawn
44
---

through the battery or the cell, but the potential difference
across the conductor is zero when no current flows through it.
Example 13.4: The potential difference between the
terminals of a battery in open circuit is 2.2 V. When it is
connected across a resistance of 5.0 Q, the potential falls to
1.8 V. Calculate the current and the internal resistance of the
battery.
Solution:
Given E =2.2V,
R=5.00,
1.8V
We are to calculate
We have
V=IR
1.8V
or
=
0.36A
5.00
Do You Know?
Internal resistance rcan be calculated by using
E
E=V+Ir
or
2.2V=1.8V+0.36Ax/
or
r=1.11VA*=1.110
Maximum Power Output
(a)
In the circuit of Fig. 13.19, as the current I flows through the
resistance R, the charges flow from a point of higher potential
E
to a point of lower potential and as such, they loose potential
I
energy. If V is the potential difference across R, the loss of
potential energy per second is V I. This loss of energy per
second appears in other forms of energy and is known as
power delivered to R by current I.
Power delivered to R=Pau=VI
R
=1°R
(:
V=IR)
(b)
As
T=E
A voltmeter connected across the
R+r
terminals of a cell measures (a) the
emf of the cell on open circuit, (b) the
E2R
terminal potential difference on a
closed circuit.
(13.17)
when R=r, the denominator of the expression of Poul is least
and so Pout out is then a maximum. Thus we see that maximum
power is delivered to a resistance (load), when the internal
resistance of the source equals the load resistance. The
45
---

value of this maximum output power as given by Eq. 13.17 is
E2
4R
13.9 KIRCHHOFF'S RULES
Ohm's law and rules of series and parallel combination of
resistance are quite useful to analyze simple electrical
circuits consisting of more than one resistance. However
such a method fails in the case of complex networks
consisting of a number of resistors, and a number of voltage
sources. Problems of such networks can be solved by a
system of analysis, which is based upon two rules, known as
Kirchhoff's rules.
Kirchhoff's First Rule
It states that the sum of all the currents meeting at a point in
the circuit is zero i.e.,
E1=0
(13.18)
It is a convention that a current flowing towards a point is
taken as positive and that flowing away from a point is taken
as negative.
Is
Consider a situation where four wires meet at a point A
4
A
(Fig. 13.20). The currents flowing into the point A are
I3
I, and I2 and currents flowing away from the point are l3 and 1.
According to the convention currents I, and I2 are positive and
currents I3 and 14 are negative. Applying Eq. 13.18 we have
13
Fig. 13.20 According to Kirchhoff's 1"
or
(13.19)
rule/
Using Eq. 13.19 Kirchhoff's first rule can be stated in other
words as
The sum of all the currents flowing
towards a point is equal to the sum of all
the currents flowing away from the point.
Kirchhoff's first rule which is also known as Kirchhoff's point
rule is a manifestation of law of conservation of charge. If
there is no sink or source of charge at a point, the total charge
flowing towards the point must be equal to the total charge
flowing away from it.
46
---

Kirchhoff's Second Rule
It states that the algebraic sum of voltage changes in a closed
circuit or a loop must be equal to zero. Consider a closed
circuit shown in Fig. 13.21. The direction of the current /
flowing through the circuit depends on the cell having the
greater emf. Suppose E1 is greater than E2, so the current
flows in counter clockwise direction (Fig. 13.21). We know
R,
E,
that a steady current is equivalent to a continuous flow of
positive charges through the circuit. We also know that a
voltage change or potential difference is equal to the work
E2
done on a unit positive charge or energy gained or lost by it in
moving from one point to the other. Thus when a positive
charge AQ due to the current I in the closed circuit
R2
(Fig. 13.21), passes through the cell E, from low (-ve) to high
potential (+ve), it gains energy because work is done on it.
Fig. 13.21 According to Kirchhoff's 2nd
Using Eq. 13.12 the energy gain is E1 AQ. When the current
rule E, IR, - E2-1R2 =0.
passes through the cell E2 it loses energy equal to - E2 AQ
because here the charge passes from high to low potential. In
going through the resistor R1. the charge AQ loses energy
equal to - IR, AQ where / R, is potential difference across R..
The minus sign shows that the charge is passing from high to
low potential. Similarly the loss of energy while passing
through the resistor R2 is IR,AQ. Finally the charge reaches
the negative terminal of the cell E, from where we started.
According to the law of conservation of energy the total
change in energy of our system is zero. Therefore, we can
write
E,AQ-IR,
or
E,-IR,-E,-IR,=0
(13.20)
which is Kirchhoff's second rule and it states that
The algebraic sum of potential changes
in a closed circuit is zero.
We have seen that this rule is simply a particular way of
stating the law of conservation of energy in electrical
problems.
Before applying this rule for the analysis of complex network
it is worthwhile to thoroughly understand the rules for finding
the potential changes.
47
---

(i)
If a source of emf is traversed from negative to
positive terminal, the potential change is positive, it is
negative in the opposite direction.
(ii)
If a resistor is traversed in the direction of current, the
change in potential is negative, it is positive in the
opposite direction.
Example 13.6: Calculate the currents in the three
resistances of the circuit shown in Fig. 13.22.
Solution:
First we select two loops abcda and ebcfe. The choice of
e
b
a
loops is quite arbitrary, but it should be such that each
E,
E2
E,
resistance is included at least once in the selected loops.
After selecting the loops, suppose a current I, is flowing in the
4
R2
R2
R.
first loop and I2 in the second loop, all flowing in the same
sense. These currents are called loop currents. The actual
f
C
d
currents will be calculated with their help. It should be noted
R,=10 S, R2 = 30 S2, R2 = 150
that the sense of the current flowing in all loops should
E2 = 60 V. E1 = 50 V
essentially be the same. It may be clockwise or anticlockwise.
Fig. 13.22
Here we have assumed it to be clockwise (Fig. 13.22).
We now apply Kirchhoff's second rule to obtain the equations
required to calculate the currents through the resistances. We
first consider the loop abcda. Starting at a point 'a' we follow
the loop clockwise. The voltage change while crossing the
battery E, is - E, because the current flows through it from
positive to negative. The voltage change across R, is - I,R1.
The resistance R2 is common to both the loops I, and 12
therefore, the currents I, and 12 simultaneously flow through it.
The directions of currents 1, and 12 as flowing through R2 are
opposite, so we have to decide that which of these currents is
to be assigned a positive sign. The convention regarding the
sign of the current is that if we are applying the Kirchhoffs
second rule in the first loop, then the current of this loop i.e, I,
will be assigned a positive sign and all currents, flowing
opposite to I, have a negative sign. Similarly, while applying
Kirchhoffs second rule in the second loop, the current I2 will be
considered as positive and I as negative. Using this
convention the current flowing through R2 is (I, - 12) and the
voltage change across is - (I, - [2) R2 The voltage change
across the battery E2 is E2 Thus the Kirchhoffs second rule as
applied to the loop abcda gives
= 0
48
---

Substituting the values, we have
-40V-I,x100-(1-I2)x30060 V=0
20 V-100x[1,+3(1,-I2)]0 -
or
(13.21)
Similarly applying Kirchhoff's second rule to the loop ebcfe,
we get
- E2 - (12-1) R2-12R,+ E3 =0
Substituting the values, we have
-60V-(12-1)x300-12x150+50V=0
10V-150x[12+2(12-I)]=0
or
61,-97,=2VQ`=2A
(13.22)
Solving Eq. and Eq. 13.22 and I we get
and
Knowing the values of loop currents I and I2 the actual
current flowing through each resistance of the circuit can be
determined. Fig. 13.22 shows that I and I2 are the actual
currents through the resistances R1 and R3. The actual
current through R2 is the difference of I, and I2 and its direction
is along the larger current. Thus
The current through R, = = 0.66 A flowing in the
direction of Li.e., from a to d.
The current through 0.44 flowing in
the direction of I, i.e., from c to b.
The current through A flowing in the
direction of I i.e., from ftoe.
Procedure of Solution of Circuit Problems
After solving the above problem we are in a position to apply
the same procedure to analyse other direct current complex
networks. While using Kirchhoff's rules in other problems, it is
worthwhile to follow the approach given below:
(i)
Draw the circuit diagram.
(ii)
The choice of loops should be such that each
resistance is included at least once in the selected loops.
49
---

(iii)
Assume a loop current in each loop, all the loop
currents should be in the same sense. It may be
either clockwise or anticlockwise.
(iv)
Write the loop equations for all the selected loops.
For writing each loop equation the voltage change
across any component is positive if traversed from
low to high potential and it is negative if traversed
from high to low potential
(v)
Solve these equations for the unknown quantities.
13.9 WHEATSTONE BRIDGE
B
The Wheatstone bridge circuit shown in Fig. 13.23 consists
of four resistances R R2, R3 and R4 connected in such a way
so as to form a mesh ABCDA. A battery is connected between
points A and C. A sensitive galvanometer of resistance Rg is
A
C
connected between points B and D. If the switch S is closed,
1,
l3
a current will flow through the galvanometer. We are to
determine the condition under which no current flows
through the galvanometer even after the switch is closed. For
R,
R
this purpose we analyse this circuit using Kirchhoff's second
rule. We consider the loops ABDA, BCDB and ADCA and
D
assume anticlockwise loop currents I., I2 and I3 through the
S
loops respectively. The Kirchhoff's second rule as applied to
loop ABDAgives
Fle 13.23 Wheatstone bridge circuit
(13.23)
Similarly by applying the Kirchhoff's second rule to loop
BCDB we have
(13.24)
The current flowing through the galvanometer will be zero if,
I, - l3 = With this condition Eq. 13.23 and
Eq. 13.24 reduce
-I,R,=(I,-1)R
(13.25)
-I,R2=(1-1)R,
(13.26)
Dividing Eq. 13.25 by Eq. 13.26
==3
(13.27)
4
Thus whenever the condition of Eq. 13.27 is satisfied, no current
flows through the galvanometer and it shows no deflection, or
conversely when the galvanometer in the Wheatstone bridge
circuit shows no deflection, Eq. 13.27 is satisfied.
50
---

If we connect three resistances R1, R2 and R3 of known
adjustable values and a fourth resistance R4 of unknown
value and the resistances R,, R2 and R3 are so adjusted that
the galvanometer shows no deflection then, from the known
resistances R1, R2 and R3 the unknown resistance R4 can be
determined by using Eq. 13.27.
13.10 POTENTIOMETER
Potential difference is usually measured by an instrument
called a voltmeter. The voltmeter is connected across the two
points in a circuit between which potential difference is to be
measured. It is necessary that the resistance of the voltmeter
be large compared to the circuit resistance across which the
voltmeter is connected. Otherwise an appreciable current will
flow through the voltmeter which will alter the circuit current and
the potential difference to be measured. Thus the voltmeter can
read the correct potential difference only when it does not draw
any current from the circuit across which it is connected. An
ideal voltmeter would have an infinite resistance.
However, there are some potential measuring instruments
such as digital voltmeter and cathode ray oscilloscope which
R
practically do not draw any current from the circuit because of
A
B
their large resistance and are thus very accurate potential
C
E
,
(a)
measuring instruments. But these instruments are very
E
expensive and are difficult to use. A very simple instrument
which can measure and compare potential differences
accurately is a potentiometer.
A
B
A potentiometer consists of a resistor R in the form of a wire
on which a terminal C can slide (Fig. 13.24 a). The resistance
between A and C can be varied from 0 to R as the sliding
(b)
contact C is moved from A to B. If a battery of emf E is
Fig. 13.24
connected across R (Fig. 13.24 b), the current flowing
through it is / = E/R. If we represent the resistance between A
and C by r, the potential drop between these points will be
rl =r E/R. Thus as C is moved from A to B, rvaries from 0 to R
E
and the potential drop between A and C changes from 0 to E.
Such an arrangement also known as potential divider can be
used to measure the unknown emf of a source by using the
wwwwwww
circuit shown in Fig. 13.25. Here R is in the form of a straight
A
B
C
wire of uniform area of cross section. A source of potential,
say a cell whose emf E. is to be measured, is connected
Ex
between A and the sliding contact C through a galvanometer
G. It should be noted that the positive terminal of E, and that of
Fig. 13.25
the potential divider are connected to the same point A. If, in
51
---

the loop AGCA, the point C and the negative terminal of E, are
at the same potential then the two terminals of the
galvanometer will be at the same potential and no current will
flow through the galvanometer. Therefore, to measure the
potential E the position of C is so adjusted that the
galvanometer shows no deflection. Under this condition, the
emf E, of the cell is equal to the potential difference between A
and C whose value Er/R is known. In case of a wire of uniform
cross section, the resistance is proportional to the length of the
wire. Therefore, the unknown emf is also given by
(13.28)
where L is the total length of the wire AB and l is its length from
A to C, after C has been adjusted for no deflection. As the
maximum potential that can be obtained between A and C is E,
so the unknown emf E, should not exceed this value, otherwise
the null condition will not be obtained It can be seen that the
unknown emf E, is determined when no current is drawn from it
and therefore, potentiometer is one of the most accurate
methods for measuring potential
The method for measuring the emf of a cell as described
above can be used to compare the emfs E, and E2 of two
cells. The balancing lengths 1. and are found separately for
the two cells. Then,
E,=E and E,=E
Dividing these two equations, we get
E
(13.29)
2
2
So the ratio of the emfs is equal to ratio of the balancing
lengths.
SUMMARY
The electric current is said to be caused by the motion of electric charge.
The heat energy H produced by a current I in the wire of resistance R during a time
interval t is given by H=I'Rt
The passage of current is always accompanied by a magnetic field in the
surrounding space.
52
---

Certain liquids conduct electricity due to some chemical reaction that takes place
within them. The study of this process is known as electrolysis.
The potential difference V across the ends of a conductor is directly proportional to
the current I flowing through it provided the physical state such as temperature etc.
of the conductor remains constant.
The fractional change in resistance per kelvin is known as temperature coefficient of
resistance.
Athermistor is a heat sensitive resistor. Most thermistors have negative temperature
coefficient of resistance.
Electrical power P: P=VI=I°R=-V2 R
The emf E of the source is the energy supplied to unit charge by the cell.
The sum of all the currents meeting at a point in a circuit is zero is the Kirchhoff's first
rule.
The algebraic sum of potential changes in a closed circuit is zero is known as
Kirchhoff's second rule.
QUESTIONS
13.1 A potential difference is applied across the ends of a copper wire. What is the effect
on the drift velocity of free electrons by
(i)
increasing the potential difference
(ii)
decreasing the length and the temperature of the wire
13.2
Do bends in a wire affect its electrical resistance? Explain.
13.3 What are the resistances of the resistors given in the figures A and B? What is
the tolerance of each? Explain what is meant by the tolerance?
Brown
Silver
Green
Orange
Red
White
Gold
Yellow
A
B.
Fig. Q. 13.3
13.4
Why does the resistance of a conductor rise with temperature?
13.5
What are the difficulties in testing whether the filament of a lighted bulb obeys Ohm's
law?
53
---

13.6
Is the filament resistance lower or higher in a 500 W, 220 V light bulb than in a 100 W,
220 V bulb?
13.7
Describe a circuit which will give a continuously varying potential.
13.8
Explain why the terminal potential difference of a battery decreases when the
current drawn from it is increased?
13.9 What is Wheatstone bridge? How can it be used to determine an unknown
resistance?
PROBLEMS
13.1 How many electrons pass through an electric bulb in one minute if the 300 mA
current is passing through it?
(Ans: 1.12x1020)
13.2 Acharge of 90 C passes through a wire in 1 hour and 15 minutes. What is the current
in the wire?
(Ans: 20mA)
13.3 Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit (Fig.P.13.3), total current drawn from the
source and the current through each resistor.
R,=60
wwww
R2= 3 a
www
wwww
R,=60
6V
Fig. P. 13.3
(Ans: 6.0 O, 1.0 A, 0.5 A, 0.5 A, 1.0A)
13.4 A rectangular bar of iron is 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm in cross section and 40 cm long.
Calculate its resistance if the resistivity of iron is 11 x 10 Qm.
(Ans: 1.1x10*0)
13.5
The resistance of an iron wire at 0 °C is 1 X 10 Q. What is the resistance at 500 °C if
the temperature coefficient of resistance of iron is 5.2x103 K? (Ans: 3.6 X 104 a
13.6 Calculate terminal potential difference of each of cells in circuit of Fig. P. 13.6.
8.00
0.90 S2
n 0.10
24V
6.0V
(Ans: 23.8 V, 7.8 V)
Fig.P. 13.6
54
---

13.7
Find the current which flows in all the resistances of the circuit of Fig. P.13.7.
9.0 V
6.0 V
18.02
12 C2
Fig. P. 13.7
(Ans: 1.25A,0.5A)
13.8
Find the current and power dissipated in each resistance of the circuit, shown in
Fig. P.13.8.
1.0 S
1.0 a
6.0 V
2.0 o
2.0
10V
1.00
1.0 St
W
Fig.P. 13.8
(Ans: 0.8A, 1.4 A, 2.2 A, 0.64 W, 1.96 W, 3.92 W, & 9.68 W)
55
---