
Chapter
21
NUCLEAR PHYSICS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1.
Understand the qualitative treatment of Rutherford's scattering experiment and the
evidence it provides for the existence and small size of nucleus.
2.
Distinguish between nucleon number (mass number) and atomic number.
3.
Understand that an element can exist in various isotopic forms each with a different
number of neutrons.
4.
Understand the use of mass spectrograph to demonstrate the existence of isotopes
and to measure their relative abundance.
5.
Understand mass defect and calculate binding energy using Einstein's equation.
6.
Illustrate graphically the variation of binding energy per nucleon with the mass
number.
7.
Appreciate the spontaneous and random nature of nuclear decay.
8.
Explain the meaning of half-life.
9.
Recognize and use decay law.
10.
Understand and describe the interaction of nuclear radiation with matter.
11.
Understand the use of Wilson cloud chamber, Geiger Muller counter and solid state
detectors to detect the radiations.
12.
Appreciate that atomic number and mass number conserve in nuclear process.
13.
Describe energy and mass conservation in simple reactions and in radioactive
decay.
14.
Understand and describe the phenomena of nuclear fission and nuclear fusion.
15.
Explain the working principle of nuclear reactor.
16.
Be aware of various types of nuclear reactors.
17.
Show an awareness about nuclear radiation exposure and biological effects of
radiation.
18.
Describe in simple terms the use of radiations for medical diagnosis and therapy.
19.
Understand qualitatively the importance of limiting exposure to ionizing radiation.
20.
Outline the use of tracer technique to obtain diagnostic information about internal
structures.
21.
Describe examples of the use of radioactive tracers in diagnosis,
22.
Describe basic forces of nature.
23.
Describe the modern view of the building blocks of matter based on hadrons,
leptons and quarks.
219
---

Soon after the discovery of electron and proton in an atom,
the quest started to find the way in which these charged
particles are present in an atom. From his experiments
Ernest Rutherford developed a nuclear model of the atom.
His model of the atom consisted of a small dense, positively
charged nucleus with negative electrons orbiting about it. In
1920 Rutherford suggested that there is probably another
particle within the nucleus, neutral one, to which he gave the
name neutron. James Chadwick discovered neutron in 1932.
Do You Know?
21.1 ATOMIC NUCLEUS
Negative
At the centre of each and every atom there is an
electron
infinitesimally small nucleus. The entire positive charge of
the atom and about 99.9 percent of its mass is concentrated
in the nucleus. The tininess of the nucleus can be imagined
by comparing that the radius of the atom is 10 times the
radius of the nucleus.
A nucleus consists of nucleons comprising of protons and
neutrons. A proton has a positive charge equal to
1.6x10-18 C and its mass is 1.673x1027 kg. A neutron has no
Positive
charge on it, but its mass is 1.675 x 10 kg. The mass of a
nucleus
neutron is almost equal to mass of proton. To indicate the
mass of atomic particles, instead of kilogram, unified mass
From a-particles scattering
experiments Lord Rutherford
scale (u) is generally used. By definition 1u is exactly one
concluded that most of the part of an
twelveth the mass of carbon 12 atom(1u=1.6606 x10-27 kg). In
atom is empty and that mass is
this unit the mass of a proton is 1.007276 u and that of a
concentrated in a very small region
called nucleus.
neutron is 1.008665 u while that of an electron is 0.00055 U.
The charge on a proton is equal in magnitude to the charge
on an electron. The charge on the proton is positive while that
of an electron is negative. As an atom on the whole is
electrically neutral, therefore, we can conclude that the
number of protons inside the nucleus is equal to the number
of electrons outside the nucleus. The number of protons
inside a nucleus is called the atomic number or the charge
number of an atom. It is denoted by Z. Thus the total charge
of any nucleus is Ze, here' e indicates charge on one proton.
The combined number of all the protons and neutrons in
a nucleus is known as its mass number and is denoted
by A.
The number of neutrons N present in a nucleus is given by
N =(A-Z)
(21.1)
220
---

We now consider different elements of the periodic table.
Hydrogen atom is simplest of all the atoms Its nucleus is
composed of only one proton; that is for hydrogen A = 1,
Z = 1. That is why hydrogen is represented by the symbol H.
Next in the periodic table after the hydrogen element is the
helium element. Its nucleus contains two protons and two
neutrons. This means for helium A = 4 and Z = 2; and hence
helium is represented as He We now take the example of
uranium - a heavy element of the periodic table. The charge
number Z of uranium is 92 while its mass number A is 235. This
H
is
represented as 235 92 It has 92 protons while the number of
(a) (Protium)
neutrons N is given by the equation N=A - Z = 235 - 92 = 143.
In this way the number of protons and neutrons in atoms of all
the elements of the periodic table can be determined. It has
been observed that the number of neutrons and protons in the
initial light elements of the periodic table is almost equal but in
the later heavy elements the number of neutrons is greater
than the number of protons in the nucleus.
21.2 ISOTOPES
H
(b) (Deuterium)
Isotopes are such nuclei of an element that have the same
charge number Z, but have different mass number A, that is
in the nucleus of such an element the number of protons is
the same, but the number of neutrons is different. Helium, for
example has two isotopes. These are symbolically
represented as He and He. As the charge number of helium
is 2, therefore, there are two protons in the helium nucleus.
The neutron number of the first isotope is, according to Eq.
21.1 is 3-2 - = 1 and that in the second isotope, He, the number
of neutron is 4 - 2 = 2. Hydrogen has three isotopes
(c) (Tritium)
represented by H, ,H,3 Its first isotope is called ordinary
Fig. 21.1
hydrogen or protium. There is only one proton in its nucleus.
The second isotope of hydrogen is called deuterium. It has
one proton and one neutron in its nucleus. Its nucleus is
called deuteron. The third isotope of hydrogen has two
neutrons and one proton in its nucleus and it is called tritium.
The isotopes of hydrogen are shown in Figs. 21.1 (a,b,c).
The chemical properties of all the isotopes of an element are
Do You Know?
alike, as the chemical properties of an element depend only
upon the number of electrons around the nucleus, that is
Both Xenon and caesium each have
36 isotopes.
upon the charge number Z. which for all the isotopes of an
element is the same. It is, therefore, not possible to separate
the isotopes of an element by chemical methods. Physical
methods are found to be successful for this purpose. A
221
---

device with the help of which not only the isotopes of any
For Your Information
element can be separated from one another but their masses
can also be determined quite accurately is called mass
Some atomic masses
spectrograph.
Particle
Mass (u)
Mass Spectrograph
e
0.00055
A simple mass spectrograph is shown in Fig. 21.2 (a). The
n
1.008665
atoms or molecules of the element under investigation, in
'H
1.007276
vapour form, are ionized in the ions source S. As a result of
ionization, one electron is removed from the particle, leaving
'H
2.014102
with a net positive charge +e. The positive ions, escaping the
'H
3.01605
slit S, are accelerated through a potential difference V
applied between the two slits S, and S2.
'He
3.01603
B (out of paper)
'He
4.002603
'Li
7.016004
10.013534
Be
14.0031
"N
16.9991
"o
S2
I
V
Metal
Plate
Detector
S1
lon
(a)
source
Fig. 21.2
The ions pass through the slit S2 in the form of a narrow beam.
The K.E. of singly charged ion at the slit S2 will be given by
1 mv = Ve
(21.2)
2
The ions are then subjected to a perpendicular and uniform
magnetic field B in a vacuum chamber, where they are
deflected in semicircular paths towards a detector. The
detector records the number of ions arriving per second. The
centripetal force applied by the magnetic field is given by
Bev = mv2
(21.3)
r
or
m=Ber
222
---

Substituting the values of vfrom Eq. 21.2, we get
m-(2v) 82
B2
(21.4)
The above equation shows that the mass of each ion
reaching the detector is proportional to B2. By adjusting the
value of B and keeping the term in the parentheses constant,
ions of different masses are allowed to enter the detector. A
graph of the detector output as a function of B2 then gives an
indication of what masses are present and the abundance of
each mass.
Fig. 21.2 (b) shows a record obtained for naturally occurring
20
21
22
neon gas showing three isotopes whose atomic mass
numbers are 20, 21, and 22. The larger is the peak, the more
B2
abundant is the isotope. Thus most abundant isotope of neon
(b) ( Proportional to atomic mass)
is neon-20.
Fig 21.2 The mass spectrum of
naturally occurring neon, showing
21.3 MASS DEFECT AND BINDING ENERGY
three isotopes whose atomic mass
number are 20,21, and 22. The larger
It is usually assumed that the whole is always equal to the sum
the peak, the more abundant the
sclope.
of its parts. This is not so in the nucleus. The results of
experiments on the masses of different nuclei show that the
mass of the nucleus is always less than the total mass of all the
protons and neutrons making up the nucleus. In the nucleus
the missing mass is called the mass defect m given by.
Am=Zm.+(A-Z)m, = - m
(21.5)
As Z is the total number of protons in the nucleus and mp is the
mass of a proton, then Zm, is the total mass of all the protons.
As shown in Eq. 21.1, (A - Z) is the total number of neutrons
and as m, is the mass of a single neutron, (A-Z)m, is the total
mass of all the neutrons. The term m nucleus is the experimentally
measured mass of the entire nucleus. Hence, Eq. 21.5
represents the difference in mass between the sum of the
masses of its constituents and the mass of the nucleus itself.
The missing mass is converted to energy in the formation of
the nucleus. This energy is found from Einstein's mass
energy relation
E=(Am)c
(21.6)
and is called the binding energy (B.E.) of the nucleus. From
equations 21.5 and 21.6, the binding energy of a nucleus is
B.E. =(Am) c2 = Zm, c2 + (A mc2 -mc2
(21.7)
223
---

Let us consider the example of the deuteron nucleus to make
the concept of mass defect and binding energy more clear.
Example 21.1: Find the mass defect and binding energy of
the deuteron nucleus. The experimental mass of deuteron is
3.3435 X 102 kg.
Solution:
Using equation 21.5, we get the mass defect of deuteron as
m=m.+m.-mo
= 1.6726x102kg+1.6749x102kg g-3.3435x10*2k - kg
=3.9754x10*kg
The B.E. of deuteron as found from Eq. 21.6is Amc2
For Your Information
Am C2: =3.9754x10 kg x(3x10°ms") = B.E.=3.5729x10*J
To express the result in eV units, divide the B.E. obtained in
joules by 1.6x1019J. Thus
Binding
energy
3.5729x10-13,
eV = 2.23 MeV
Nucleus
(smaller mass)
Separated nucleons
(greater mass)
Therefore, the bound constituents have less energy than
when they are free. That is the B.E. comes from the mass that
Energy must be supplied to break the
nucleus apart into its constituent
is lost in the process of formation. Conversely, the binding
protons and neutrons.
energy is the amount of energy that must be supplied to a
nucleus if the nucleus is to be broken up into protons and
neutrons. Experiments have revealed that such mass
defects exist in other elements as well. Shown in Fig. 21.3 is a
graph between the mass defect per nucleon and charge
(1)
To H
-0.007
Be
He
U
0.008
Os
C
Pb
o
S
Sn
-0.009
Fe
Kr
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Charge number Z
Fig. 21.3
224
---

number Z is obtained by finding the difference of mass
between the total mass of all the protons and neutrons that
form the nucleus and the experimental mass of the nucleus
and dividing this difference by mass number A, i.e.,
or Your Information
Mass defect per nucleon
Am
=
He
A
A
H
where Am is the mass defect. From the definition of mass
Binding
defect it is quite obvious that for hydrogen, mass defect is
energy
zero. The mass defect is made clear with Einstein's equation
H
E =Amc2. This equation shows that if for any reason a mass
Am is lost, them it is converted into energy.
Let us now calculate the BE of helium. For 1He
Am=2m,+2m.-m.,
= 2.01519 +2.01796u-4.00281 u = 0.03034
u
since 1 u = 1.66x10271 kg
Am = 0.03034 ux1.66x102kgu"=5.03x102kg
Thus
E.=Amc2=5.03x102kgx9x106ms
= eV= 28.2 MeV
This means that when two protons and two neutrons fuse
together to make helium nucleus, if an amount of 28.2 MeV
energy is given to the helium nucleus then it breaks up into
two protons and two neutrons. From this, we conclude that
1 u = 1.6606 x 10 kg = 931 MeV
In this way we can calculate binding energy of every element.
Shown in Fig. 21.4 is a graph between binding energy per
nucleon and the mass number of different elements. This
graph shows that the binding energy per nucleon increases
10
Fa
Xe
w
200
70
Bi
JUN
83
Ra
8
Sn
Ba
222
Rn
55
6
4
PH
2
2H
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
21.4
Nucleon number, A
225
---

with the mass number till it reaches a maximum value of 8.8
MeV at mass number 58 and then it gradually decreases to a
value of 7.6 MeV at mass number 238. The binding energy
per nucleon is maximum for iron. This shows that of all the
elements iron is the most stable element. Later in this chapter
it will be shown with the help of graph of Fig. 21.4 that when
heavy element breaks into lighter elements or the lighter
elements are fused to form heavier element then a large
amount of energy can be obtained.
21.4 RADIOACTIVITY
It has been observed that those elements whose charge
number Z is greater than 82 are unstable. Some
invisible radiations, that can affect the photographic
plates emanate out of these elements. Such elements
are called radioactive and the phenomenon is called
radioactivity. The radiations coming out of the
radioactive elements are called alpha (a), beta (B). and
gamma (y) radiation. Radioactivity was discovered by
Henri Becquerel in 1896. He found that an ore
containing uranium (Z=92) emits an invisible radiation
Photographic film
that penetrates through a black paper wrapping a
B
7
is
photographic plate and affects the plate. After
Becquerel's discovery Marie Curie and Pierre Curie
discovered two new radioactive elements that they
Vacuum
chamber
called polonium and radium.
The analysis of the radiations emanating out of a radioactive
Lead
material can be carried out by a simple experiment. The
chamber
radioactive material is placed at the centre of a block of lead
by drilling a hole in the block. Radioactive radiations enter a
vacuum chamber after emerging out of this hole. After
passing between the two parallel plates the radiations strike
Fig. 21.5
a photographic plate. These radiations, instead of impinging
at one point, fall at three different points due to the potential
Radioactive
material
difference between the plates (Fig. 21.5).
From this experiment it can be concluded that all radiations
from the radioactive material are not alike. The radiation that
bends towards the negative plate is made up of positively
charged particles. These are called a-particles. Those
radiations that bend towards the positive plate are composed
of negatively charged particles. These are called B-particles.
Those radiations that go straight without bending have no
226
---

charge on them. These are called y-rays.
Further experiments reveal that a-particles are helium nuclei.
The charge on them is +2e while their mass is 4u (atomic
mass unit) that is every a-particle has two protons and two
neutrons in it. B-particles are in fact fast moving electrons
which come out of the nucleus of a radioactive element. y-rays
like X-rays, are electromagnetic waves which issue out of the
nucleus of a radioactive element. The wavelength of these
rays is much shorter, compared with the wavelength of X-rays,
Nuclear Transmutation
Radioactivity is purely a nuclear phenomenon. This is not
affected by any physical or chemical reaction. Whenever any
particle / radiation is emitted out of any radioactive element, it
is always accompanied by some changes in the nucleus of
the element. Therefore, this element changes into a new
element. This phenomenon is called radioactive decay. The
element formed due to this change is called daughter
element. The original element is called the parent element.
During the nuclear changes the laws of conservation of
For Your Information
mass, energy, momentum and charge remain applicable.
Uranium
Thorium
We know that three types of radiations a-particle, B-particle
particle
parent
daughter
(helium
and y-rays are emitted by the naturally occurring radioactive
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus)
elements. When a-particle is emitted out of any nucleus then
146
144
2
+
due to law of conservation of matter, the mass number of the
92
90
nucleus decreases by 4, and due to law of conservation of
238
234
P2
Th
He
charge, the charge of the nucleus decreases by a magnitude
90
of 2e i.e., the charge number of the nucleus decreases by 2. It
a - decay occurs when an unstable
is due to the fact that the mass number and charge number of
parent nucleus emits an a - particle
the emitted particle a is 4 and 2 respectively. The emission of
and in the process it is converted into
the a-particle is represented by the following equation
a different (or daughter) nucleus.
A
Z
X
2-2Y+2 He
Here X represents the parent and Y the daughter element.
To explain the emission of a-particles we take the example of
radium 226 88 Ra. The emission of an a-particle from radium 226,
results in the formation of radon gas 222 86 Rn. This change is
represented by the following equation
226
88
Ra
222 86 Rn + 4He
It may be remembered that the sum of the mass numbers
and the charge numbers on both sides of the
227
---

equation are equal When a B-particle is emitted out of any
For Your Information
nucleus, then its mass number does not undergo any change
but its charge number increases by one. The emission of a
226
Ra
B-particle from any element X is represented by the following
06
Parent nucleus
a particle
equation
@
He
AX
Negative B-particle is an electron and its emission from the
222
Rn
nucleus becomes an incomprehensible enigma, as there is
86
no electron present in the nucleus. However, the emission of
The emission of u-particle from
électron from the nucleus can be thought of as a neutron
Radium-226 results in the formation
emitting an electron and becoming a proton, although the
of Radon-222 gas.
modern explanation is not that simple.
This means that the B-particle is formed at the time of
218
At
85
emission. That is why at the time of emission of a
B-particle the charge number of the nucleus increases by one
1 particle
but no change in its mass number takes place as the mass of
Be
electron is exceedingly small as compared to the mass of a
proton or a neutron. The transformation of an electron at the
The emission of (5-particle from
moment of its emission is given below by an equation
Polonium-218 results in the
formation of Astatine-218
in
H+
je
It has been observed that thonum
Th is transformed
into protactinium
Pa after the emission of Beparticle
The following equation represents this reaction
Th
Pa++
e
When a r-radiation issues out of nucleus then neither the charge
Do You Know?
number Z not the mass number A of the nucleus undergoes any
change. It is due to the fact that a y-radiation is simply a photon
Thorium
Protactinium
B-particle
that has neither any charge nor any mass. Its emission from the
parent
daughter
nucleus
nucleus
(electron)
nucleus has some resemblance with the emission of a photon
of light from an atom. We know that when any electron of an
144
143
+
9
90
91
atom absorbs energy it jumps from the ground state to a higher
energy state and the atom becomes excited. When the electron
234
Th
Pa
e
90
91
-1
of this excited atom returns to its ground state then it emits the
absorbed energy in the form of a photon In much the same way
B decay occurs when a neutron in an
the nucleus is sometimes excited to a higher state following the
unstable parent nucleus decays into
a proton and an electron, the electron
emission of a or B-particle. This excited state of the nucleus is
being emitted as the B particle. In the
unstable state, in coming back to its ground state from the
process the parent nucleus is
excited state, y-radiation is emitted
transformed into daughter nucleus.
The emission of y-radiation from a nucleus is generally
represented by this equation
228
---

AX"
2X+y radiation
Here AX" represents an excited nucleus while
X
shows
ground state of the nucleus.
21.5 HALF LIFE
We have seen that whenever an a or B-particle is emitted
from a radioactive element, it is transformed into some other
element. This radioactive decay process is quite random and
is not subjected to any symmetry. This means that we cannot
foretell about any particular atom as to when will it decay. It
could decay immediately or it may remain unchanged for
millions of year. Thus we cannot say anything about the life of
any particular atom of a radioactive element.
Let us take the example of a city with a population of one
million and we know that on the average ten person die every
day. Even with this knowledge we cannot say with certainty
that which particular person will die on which particular day.
We can only say that on the whole ten person will die. The
greater the population of the city, the greater the accuracy of
such predictions. Like the population of a city, it is not
possible to talk about an atom of a radioactive element. For
more accurate result we always talk about large groups of
atoms and laws of statistics are applied upon them. Let us
suppose that we bring a group of 100,000 atoms under
consideration and wait till such time that half of these i.e.,
50,000 decay into their daughter element. This time is called
the half-life Tia of this element. If the half-life of the said
element be one day, then after one day only 25,000 atoms
will remain behind and after two days 12,500 atoms will
remain behind. That is with the passage of every one day, the
number of atoms remaining behind becomes half of the
number already present. This example provides us the
definition of half-life of a radioactive element i.e.,
"The half-life T of a radioactive element is that
period in which half of the atoms decay".
Besides getting the definition of half-life we can deduce two
other conclusions from this example. These are, firstly no
radioactive element can completely decay. It is due to the
reason that in any half-life period only half of the nuclei decay
and in this way an infinite time is required for all the atoms to
decay.
229
---

Secondly, the number of atoms decaying in a particular
period is proportional to the number of atoms present in the
beginning of the period. If the number of atoms to start with is
large then a large number of atoms will decay in this period
and if the number of atoms present in the beginning is small
then less atoms will decay.
We can represent these results with an equation. If at any
particular time the number of radioactive atoms be N. then in
an interval At. the number of decaying atom, AN is proportional
to the time interval At and the number of atoms N, i.e.,
AN x - NAt
or
AN = NAT
(21.8)
where n is the constant of proportionality and is called decay
constant. Eq. 21.8 shows that if the decay constant of any
element is large then in a particular interval more of its atoms
will decay and if the constant a is small then in that very
interval less number of atoms will decay, From Eq. 21.8 we
can define decay constant as given below
At
here AN / N is the fraction of the decaying atoms. Thus decay
constant of any element is equal to the fraction of the
No
decaying atoms per unit time. The unit of the decay constant
is s The negative sign in the Eq. 21.8 indicates the decrease
in the number of atoms N.
The decay ability of any radioactive element can be shown by
1
a graphic method also.
No
2
We know that every radioactive element decay at a particular
N,
rate with time. If we draw a graph between number of atoms in
4
the sample of the radioactive element present at different times
No
and the time then a curve as shown in Fig. 21.6 will be
0
obtained. This graph shows that in the beginning the number of
0
Tex 2T, 11 3T 4Tm, 5T, VI
atoms present in the sample of the radioactive element was No
Time (f)
with the passage of time the number of these atoms decreased
Fig. 21.6 The half life This of a
due to their decay. This graph is called decay curve.
radioactive decay is the time in which
one-half of the radioactive nuclei
After a period of one half-life No /2 number of atoms of this
disintegrate.
radioactive element are left behind. If we wait further for
another half-period then half of the remaining N, / 2 atoms
decay, and 1/2xN, = (1/2)2 No atoms remain behind. After
230
---

the expiry of further period of a half-life, half of the remaining
(1/2)2 No atoms decay. The number of atoms that remain un-
decayed is 1/2x(1/2)2. = (1/2) N.. We can conclude from
this example that if we have No number of any radioactive
element then after a period of n half-lives the number of
atoms left behind is (1/2)"N.
It has been found that the estimate of decay of every
radioactive element is according to the graph of Fig.21.6 but
the half-life of every radioactive element is different. For
example the half-life of uranium-238 is 4.5 X 10" years while
the half-life of radium-226 is 1620 years. The half-life of some
radio active elements is very small, for example, the half-life
of radon gas is 3.8 days and that of uranium-239 is 23.5
minutes.
From the above discussion it is found that the estimate of any
radioactive element can be made from its half-life or by
determining its decay constant a. It can be proved with the
help of calculus that the following relations exist between the
decay constant a and the half-life T,
=0.693
(21.9)
Eq. 21.9 shows that if the decay constant a of any radioactive
element is known, its half-life can be found.
Any stable element, besides the naturally occurring
radioactive element, can be made radioactive. For this very
high energy particles are bombarded on the stable element.
This bombardment excites the nuclei and the nuclei after
becoming unstable become radioactive element. Such
radioactive elements are called artificial radioactive
elements.
Example 21.2:
Iodine-131 is an artificial radioactive
isotope. It is used for the treatment of human thyroid gland.
Its half-life is 8 days. In the drug store of a hospital 20 mg of
iodine-131 is present. It was received from the laboratory 48
days ago. Find the quantity of iodine-131 in the hospital after
this period.
Solution:
As the half-life of iodine is 8 days, therefore in 8 days half of
the iodine decays. Given below in the table is the amount of
iodine present after every 8 days.
231
---

Interval in
Quantity of
Interval in
days
Quantity of
lodine
days
lodine
0
20 mg
32
1.25 mg
8
10 mg
40
0.625 mg
16
5 mg
48
0.3125 mg
24
2.5 mg
Thus 48 days after the receipt, the amount of iodine-131 left
behind is only 0.3125 mg.
21.6 INTERACTION OF RADIATION WITH
MATTER
An a-particle travels a well defined distance in a medium
before coming to rest. This distance is called the range of the
particle. As the particle passes through a solid, liquid or gas, it
loses energy due to excitation and ionization of atoms and
molecules in the matter. The ionization may be due to direct
elastic collisions or through electrostatic attraction. lonization
is the main interaction with matter to detect the particle or to
measure its energy. The range depends on the
i.
charge, mass and energy of the particle and
ii.
the density of the medium and ionization potentials
of the atoms of the medium.
Since a-particle is about 7000 times more massive than an
electron, so it does not suffer any appreciable deflection from
its straight path, provided it does not approach too closely to
the nucleus of the atom. Thus a-particle continues producing
intense ionization along its straight path till it loses all its energy
and comes almost to rest. It, then, captures two electrons from
the medium and becomes a neutral helium atom.
B-particles also lose energy by producing ionization. However,
its ionizing ability is about 100 times less than that of a-
particles. As a result its range is about 100 times more than a-
particles. B-particles are more easily deflected by collisions
than heavy a-particles. Thus the path of B-particles in matter is
not straight but shows much straggling or scattering. The
range of B-particles is measured by the effective depth of
penetration into the medium not by the length of erratic path.
The more dense the material through which the particle
moves, the shorter its range will be.
232
---

a and B-particles both radiate energy as X-ray photons when
they are slowed by the electric field of the charged particles in
a solid material.
Photons of y-rays, being uncharged, cause very little
ionization. Photons are removed from a beam by either
scattering or absorption in the medium. They interact with
matter in three distinct ways, depending mainly on their
energy.
(i)
At low energies (less than about 0.5 MeV), the
dominant process that removes photons from a beam
is the photoelectric effect.
(ii)
At intermediate energies, the dominant process is
Compton scattering.
(iii)
At higher energies (more than 1.02 MeV), the
dominant process is pair production.
In air y-rays intensity falls off as the inverse square of the
distance from the source, in much the same manner as light
from a lamp. In solids, the intensity decreases exponentially
with increasing depth of penetration into the material. The
intensity I of a beam after passing through a distance X in the
medium is reduced to intensity / given by the relation 1=1e
where H is the linear absorption coefficient of the medium.
This coefficient depends on the energy of the photon as well
as on the properties of the medium.
Charged particles a or B and y-radiation produce fluorescence
or glow on striking some substance like zinc sulphide, sodium
iodide or barium platinocyanide coated screens.
"Fluorescence is the property of absorbing
radiant energy of high frequency and re-
emitting energy of low frequency in the visible
region of electromagnetic spectrum".
Neutrons, being neutral particles, are extremely penetrating
particles. To be stopped or slowed, a neutron must undergo a
direct collision with a nucleus or some other particle that has
a mass comparable to that of the neutron. Materials such as
water or plastic, which contain more low-mass nuclei per unit
volume, are used to stop neutrons. Neutrons produce a little
indirect ionization when they interact with materials
containing hydrogen atoms and knock out protons.
233
---

Table 21.1 The summary of the nature of a, B & Y radiation
Characteristics
-particles
B-particles
y-rays
1. Nature
Helium nuclei of
Electrons or positrons from
E. M. waves from
charge 2e
the nucleus of charge te
excited nuclei with no
charge
2. Typical
Radon-222
Strontium-94
Cobalt-60
sources
3. Ionization
About 104
About 102
About 1
(lon pairs mmi'in air)
4. Range in air
Several
Several metres
Obeys inverse square
centimetres
law
5. Absorbed by
A paper
1-5 mm of Al sheet
1-10 cm of lead sheet
6. Energy
Emitted with the
Variable energy
Variable energy
spectrum
same energy
7. Speed
10 ms
-1 x 108 ms
-3 X 10 ms
21.7 RADIATION DETECTORS
Nuclear radiations cannot be detected by our senses, hence,
we use some observable detecting methods employing the
interaction of radiation with matter. Most detectors of
radiation make use of the fact that ionization is produced
along the path of the particle. These detectors include Wilson
cloud chamber, Geiger counter and solid state detectors.
Wilson Cloud Chamber
It is a device which shows the visible path of an ionizing
Camera
particle. It makes use of the fact that supersaturated vapours
condense preferentially on ions. If an ionizing particle passes
Glass Window
Radiation
through a region in which cloud droplets are about to form, the
droplets will form first along the particle's path, showing the
path as a trail of droplets. The apparatus consists of a
Vapours
Light
cylindrical glass chamber closed at the upper end by a glass
window and at the lower end by a movable piston (Fig. 21.7). A
black felt pad soaked in alcohol is placed on a metal plate
inside the chamber. The air soon becomes saturated with
To vacuum
Moveable piston
alcohol vapours. A rapid expansion is produced by pulling
quickly the piston of the bicycle pump having the leather
Wilson Cloud Chamber
washer reversed so that it removes air. The sudden cooling
Fig. 21.7
resulted from adiabatic expansion helps to form
supersaturated vapours. As radiation passes through the
chamber, ions are produced along the path. The tiny droplets
234
---

of moisture condense about these ions and form vapour tracks
showing the path of the radiation. These are the atomic versions
of the ice crystals left in the sky by a jet plane when suitable
conditions exist. The fog tracks are illuminated with a lamp and
may be seen or photographed through the glass window.
The a-particles leave thick, straight and continuous tracks
due to intense ionization produced by them as shown in
Fig. 21.8 (a), B-particles form thin and discontinuous tracks
(a) a Particle
extending in erratic manner showing frequent deflections
(Fig. 21.8 b) and y-rays leave no definite tracks along their
path (Fig. 21.8 c). The length of the cloud tracks has been
found proportional to the energy of the incident particle. A
high potential difference of the order of 1 kV between the top
and bottom of the chamber provides an electric field which
clears away all the unwanted ions from the chamber to make
it ready for use. The tracks seen are, therefore, those of rays
that pass the chamber as the expansion occurs.
The chamber may be placed in a strong magnetic field
(b)
B- Particle
which will bend the paths providing information about the
charge, mass and energy of the radiating particle. In this
way, it has helped in the discovery of many new particles.
Geiger-Muller Counter
Geiger-Muller tube is a well-known radiation detector
(Fig. 21.9 a). The discharge in the tube results from the
ionization produced by the incident radiation. It consists
of a stiff central wire acting as an anode in a hollow metal
(c)
y-Rays
cylinder acting as a cathode filled with a suitable mixture
of gas at about 0.1 atmospheric pressure. One end of the
Fig. 21.8 Cloud chamber tracks
tube has a thin mica window to allow the entry of a or
of or, By radiations
B-particles and other end is sealed by non-conducting
material and carries the connecting pins for the two
electrodes. A high potential difference, (about 400 V for
neon - bromine filled tubes) but slightly less than that
lons
Radiation
+
400V
Thin mica window
Argon gas
Cathode
Anode
Fig. 21.9 (a)
Geiger - Muller Tube
235
---

necessary to produce discharge through the gas is
maintained between the electrodes, When radiation
enters the tube, ionization is produced. The free
electrons are attracted towards the positively charged
central wire. As they are accelerated towards the wire
by a strong electric field, they collide with other
molecules of the gas and knock out more electrons
which in turn do the same and produce a cascade of
electrons that move towards the central wire. This
makes a short pulse of electric current to pass through
an external resistor. It is amplified and registered
electronically. The counter, which also provides the
(b) G.M. Tube with scaler unit
power, is called a scaler.
Fig. 21.9
The cascade of electrons produced by the entry of an
ionizing particle is counted as a single pulse of approximately
of the same size whatever the energy or path of the particle
maybe. It cannot, thus, discriminate between the energies of
the incident particle as output pulses are same. The entire
electron pulse takes less than 1H S. However, positive ions,
being very massive than the electrons, take several hundred
times as long to reach the outer cathode. During this time,
called the dead time ("10" s) of the counter, further incoming
particles cannot be counted When positive ions strike the
cathode, secondary electrons are emitted from the surface.
These electrons would be accelerated to give further
spurious counts. This is prevented by mixing a small amount
of quenching gas with the principal gas.
The quenching gas must have an ionization potential lower
than that of inert or principal gas. Thus, the ions of quenching
gas reach the cathode before principal gas ions. When they
reach near the cathode, they capture electrons and become
neutral molecules. Following neutralization, the excess
energy of the quenching molecules is dissipated in
dissociation of the molecules rather than in the release of
electrons from the cathode. For example, bromine gas is
added to neon gas. The bromine molecules absorb energy
from the ions or secondary electrons and dissociate into
bromine atoms. The atoms then readily recombine into
molecules again for the next pulse. The gas quenching is
called self quenching. Although all commercial Geiger tubes
are self quenched, it is common practice to use electronic
quenching in addition. For this purpose, a large negative
voltage is applied to the anode immediately after recording
236
---

the output pulse. This reduces the electric field bleow the
critical value for ionization by collision. The negative voltage
remains until all the positive ions are collected at cathode
thus preventing secondary pulses.
Geiger counter can be used to determine the range or
penetration power of ionizing particles. The reduction in the
count rate by inserting metal plates of varying thickness
between the source and the tube helps to estimate the
penetration power of the incident radiation.
Geiger counter is not suitable for fast counting. It is because
of its relatively long "dead time" of the order of more than a
millisecond which limits the counting rate to a few hundred
counts per second If particles are incident on the tube at a
faster rate, not all of them will be counted since some will
arrive during the dead time. Solid state detectors are fast
enough, more efficient and accurate.
Particles
Solid State Detector
A solid state detector is a specially designed p-n Junction
(Fig. 21.10) operating under a reversed bias in which
n - type
electron-hole pairs are produced by the incident radiation to
Depletion region
50
cause a current pulse to flow through the external circuit. The
Thin
gold
detector is made from a p-type silicon or germanium. An n-
foil
II Type
type thin layer is produced by doping the top surface with
To
donor type impurity. The top and bottom surfaces are coated
R
Amplifier
with a thin layer of gold to make good conducting contact with
and
external circuit. The combined thickness of
Scaler
n-type and gold layer absorbs so less energy of the incident
particle that the junction may be assumed to be situated at
the front surface. This is known as the surface barrier type
Solid state detector
detector. A reverse bias is applied through the two
Fig. 21.10
conducting layers of gold. This enlarges the charge free
region around the junction called depletion region. Normally
no current flows through the circuit. When an incident particle
penetrates through the depletion region, it produces
electron-hole pairs, These mobile charge carriers move
towards the respective sides due to applied electric field. This
gives rise to a current in the external circuit due to which a
pulse of voltage is generated across the resistance R. This
pulse is amplified and registered by a scaler unit. The size of
the pulse is found proportional to the energy absorbed of the
incident particle. The energy needed to produce an electron-
hole pair is about 3 eV to 4 eV which makes the device useful
for detecting low energy particles. The collection time of
electrons and holes is much less than gas filled counters and
hence a solid state detector can count very fast. It is much
smaller in size than any other detector and operates at low
voltage. The above mentioned type detector is used for
detecting a or B-particles but a specially designed device
237
---

can be used for y-rays.
21.8 NUCLEAR REACTIONS
While studying radioactivity, we have seen that an a
particle is emitted from radium-226 and radon-222 is
obtained. This nuclear change is represented by the
following equation
226
88
Ra
Such an equation represents a nuclear reaction. Above
mentioned nuclear reaction takes place on its own accord.
However, it was Rutherford who, first of all, expressed his
opinion that besides natural radioactive decay processes,
other nuclear reactions can also occur. A particle X is
bombarded on any nucleus X and this process yield a
nucleus Y and a light object y as given below
X+x-+++y
For Your Information
Rutherford performed an experiment on the nuclear reaction
in 1918. He bombarded a-particles on nitrogen. He observed
that as a result of this reaction, oxygen is obtained and a
proton is emitted. That is
Proton 'H
1
1,N+1 He
101 + H
This reaction indicated that when a-particle enters the
"He
14
2
N
nucleus of 14 N then an excitation is produced in it. And as a
17
result of it
o
8
and a proton are produced. Since the
experiment of Rutherford, innumerable nuclear reactions
ix particle
17
have been observed. For nuclear reactions to take place, the
o
B
fulfillment of certain conditions is a must.
An alpha-proton nuclear reaction
Before and after any nuclear reaction the number of protons
and neutrons must remain the same because protons and
neutrons can neither be destroyed nor can they be created.
We elaborate this point from the example of Rutherford's
nuclear reaction of IN and , here
Number of protons = 7+2=8+1
Number of neutrons = 7+2=9+0
A nuclear reaction can take place only when the total energy of
the reactants including the rest mass energy is equal to the
total energy of the products. For its explanations we again take
the example of the nuclear reaction of Rutherford involving
14 N and He In this reaction the mass of the reactants is
238
---

Mass of ,N = 14.0031u
Mass of 2He = 4.0026 u
Total mass of the reactants = 18.0057
In the same way the mass of the products is
Mass of 17 o = 16.9991 u
Mass of H =1.0078
Total mass of the products after the reaction = 18.0069 u
This shows that the total mass after the reaction is greater
than the total mass before the reaction by 0.0012 u. We know
that a 1u mass = 931 MeV energy, therefore, a mass
difference of 0.0012u is equivalent to an energy of
931 MeV X 0.0012 u = 1.13 MeV. Hence this reaction is
possible only when an additional mass of 0.0012 u is added
into the reactants or the minimum kinetic energy of the a-
particle is 1.13 MeV such as obtained from ²14 Po. The energy
of these a-particles is equal to 7.7 MeV which is greater than
1.13 MeV. Had these a-particles been obtained from a
source that give out a-particles whose energy was less than
1.13 MeV then this reaction would not have taken place.
From the conditions described above we can tell whether any
nuclear reaction is possible or not. There is an interesting
aspect in a nuclear reaction that it can take place in the
opposite direction also. We know that 17 8 o is obtained by the
interaction14 N with an a-particle of appropriate energy. If we
accelerate protons, with the help of a machine like cyclotron,
and increase their velocity and then bombard these high
velocity protons on 17 8 o, Rutherford's nuclear reaction of IN
and a-particle will proceed in the backward direction as
101 H 1,N+
By bombarding different elements with a-particles, protons
and neutrons, many nuclear reactions have been produced.
Now we describe one such nuclear reaction with the help of
which James Chadwick discovered neutron in 1932. When
Be was bombarded with a-particles emitted out of 210 10Po,
then as a result of a nuclear reaction, 12 6 C and a neutron were
obtained. This reaction is shown below with an equation
Be + He on
As neutron carries no charge, therefore, it presented
a great amount of difficulty for its identification. Anyhow
239
---

when neutrons were passed through a block of paraffin, fast
moving protons were ejected out and these were easily
identified. It may be remembered that a large amount of
hydrogen is present in paraffin and the nuclei of hydrogen
Protons
atoms are protons. The emission of protons is the
n
consequence of elastic collisions between the neutrons and
the protons. This indicates that the mass of neutron is equal
to the mass of the proton. It may be remembered that when
an object of certain mass collides with another object of equal
mass at rest, then as a result of elastic collision, the moving
Po
source
object comes to rest and the stationary object begins to move
Be
Parafiin
with the velocity of the colliding object. The discovery of
Fig. 21.11
neutron has brought in a revolution in nuclear reactions, as
the neutrons carry no charge so they can easily enter the
nucleus. Fig. 21.11 shows the arrangement of Chadwick's
experiment for the discovery of neutron.
21.9 NUCLEAR FISSION
Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann of Germany while working
upon the nuclear reactions made a startling discovery. They
observed that when slow moving neutrons are bombarded
on 255U, 92 then as a result of the nuclear reaction 141 56 Ba 36 9Z Kr
and
an average of three neutrons are obtained. It may be
remembered that the mass of both krypton and barium is less
than that of the mass of uranium. This nuclear reaction was
different from hither to studied other nuclear reactions, in two
ways. First as a result of the breakage of the uranium
nucleus, two nuclei of almost equal size are obtained,
whereas in the other nuclear reactions the difference
between the masses of the reactants and the products was
not large. Secondly a very large amount of energy is given
out in this reaction.
"Such a reaction in which a heavy nucleus like
that of uranium splits up into two nuclei of roughly
equal size along with the emission of energy
during the reaction is called fission reaction".
Fission reaction of 235 92 U can be represented by the equation
235 92 U+ on
141
56
Ba
+ 92 36 Kr + 3on + Q
here Q is the energy given out in this reaction. By
comparing the total energy on the left side of the
equation with total energy on the right side, we find that
in the fission of one uranium nucleus about 200 MeV
240
---

energy is given out. It may be kept in mind that there is no
difference between the sum of the mass and the charge
numbers on both sides of the equation. Fission reaction
is shown in Fig. 21.12 (a) and (b). Fission reaction can
be easily explained with the help of graph of Fig. 21.4.
This graph shows that the binding energy per nucleon is
greatest for the middle elements of the periodic table and
this binding energy per nucleon is a little less for the light
or very heavy elements i.e., the nucleons in the light or
(a)
very heavy elements are not so rigidly bound. For
example the binding energy per nucleon for uranium is
141
Ba
56
236
92
235
U
92
+
n
(b)
Compound
nucleus
92
Kr
36
Fig. 21.12
Process of Fission reaction
about 7.7 MeV and the products of the fission reaction of
uranium, namely barium and krypton, have binding
energy of about 8.5 MeV per nucleon. Thus when a
uranium nucleus breaks up, as a result of fission reaction,
into barium and krypton, then an energy at the rate of
(8.5-7.6) = 0.9 MeV per nucleon is given out. This means
that an energy 235 X 0.9 = 211.5 MeV is given out in the
fission of one uranium nucleus.
The fission process of uranium does not always produce the
same fragments (Ba, Kr). In fact any of the two nuclei present
in the upper horizontal part of binding energy could be
produced. Two possible fission reactions of uranium are given
below as an example:
235 92 U + on
132 50 Sn + 101 42 Mo + 3 on + Q
241
---

235 92 U on
140
54
Xe + 94 38 Sr+2 on + Q
Hence in the uranium fission reaction several products may
be produced. All of these products (fragments) are
radioactive. Fission reaction is not confined to uranium alone;
it is possible in many other heavy elements. However, it has
been observed that fission takes place very easily with the
slow neutrons in uranium-235 and plutonium-239, and mostly
these two are used for fission purposes.
Fig. 21.13
Fission Chain Reaction
We have observed that during fission reaction, a nucleus of
uranium-235 absorbs a neutron and breaks into two nuclei of
almost equal masses besides emitting two or three neutrons.
By properly using these neutrons fission reaction can be
produced in more uranium atoms such that a fission reaction
n
U
n
can continuously maintain itself. This process is called
235
fission chain reaction. Suppose that we have a definite
(a)
amount of 235 92 U and a slow neutron originating from any
source produces fission reaction in one atom of uranium. Out
n
of this reaction about three neutrons are emitted If
conditions are appropriate these neutrons produce fission in
n
some more atoms of uranium, In this way this process
rapidly proceeds and in an infinitesimal small time a large
amount of energy along with huge explosion is produced.
n
n
Fig.21.13 is the representation of fission chain reaction.
n
235
n
It is possible to produce such conditions in which only one
U
neutron, out of all the neutrons created in one fission reaction,
(b)
becomes the cause of further fission reaction. The other
neutrons either escape out or are absorbed in any other
medium except uranium. In this case the fission chain
Uses
reaction proceeds with its initial speed. To understand these
conditions carefully look at Fig. 21.14. In Fig. 21.14 (a) a
fission reaction in a thin sheet of 235 92 U is shown to be in
progress. The resulting neutrons scatter in the air and so they
cannot produce any fission chain reaction. Fig. 21.14 (b)
shows some favourable conditions for chain reaction. Some
of the neutrons produced in the first fission reaction produce
(c)
only one more fission reaction but here also no chain reaction
is produced. In Fig. 21.14 (c) a sphere of 235 92 U is shown. If the
Fig 21.14
sphere is sufficiently big, then most of the neutrons produced
by the fission reaction get absorbed in 235 92 U before they
escape out of the sphere and produce chain reaction. Such a
242
---

mass of uranium in which one neutron, out of all the neutrons
produced in one fission reaction, produces further fission is
called critical mass. The volume of this mass of uranium is
For Your Information
called critical volume.
If the mass of uranium is much greater than the critical
Neutron
mass, then the chain reaction proceeds at a rapid speed
and a huge explosion is produced. Atom bomb works at
this principle. If the mass of uranium is less than the
Uranium
critical mass, the chain reaction does not proceed. If
the mass of uranium is equal to the critical mass, the
absorbed
chain reaction proceeds at its initial speed and in this
neutron
way we get a source of energy. Energy, in an atomic
reactor, is obtained according to this principle. The
absorbed
chain reaction is not allowed to run wild, as in an atomic
neutron
bomb but is controlled by a series of rods, usually made
of cadmium, that are inserted into the reactor. Cadmium
is an element that is capable of absorbing a large
absorbed
number of neutrons without becoming unstable or
neutron
radioactive. Hence, when the cadmium control rods are
In a controlled chain reaction, only
inserted into the reactor, they absorb neutrons to cut
one neutron, on average, from each
down on the number of neutrons that are available for
fission event causes another
nucleus to fission. As a result,
the fission process. In this way the fission reaction is
energy is released at a steady or
controlled rate.
controlled.
Nuclear Reactor
In a nuclear power station the reactor plays the same part
as does furnace in a thermal power station. In a furnace,
coal or oil is burnt to produce heat, while in a reactor fission
reaction produces heat. When fission takes place in the
atom of uranium or any other heavy atom, then an energy at
the rate of 200 MeV per nucleus is produced This energy
appears in the form of kinetic energy of the fission
fragments. These fast moving fragments besides colliding
with one another also collide with the uranium atoms. In this
way their kinetic energy gets transformed in heat energy.
This heat is used to produce steam which in turn rotates the
turbine. Turbine rotates the generator which produces
electricity. A sketch of a nuclear power station is shown in
Fig. 21.15.
243
---

Pressurized
Hot steam
water
Electrio
Turbine
generator
Pump
Condenser
Pump
Reactor
Water
Water
Heat exchange
out
Fig. 21.15
Areactor usually has four important parts. These are:
1.
The most important and vital part of a reactor is called
core. Here the fuel is kept in the shape of cylindrical
tubes. Reactor fuels are of various types. Uranium
was used as fuel in the elementary reactors. In this
fuel the quantity of 235 92 U is increased from 2 to 4
percent. It may be remembered that the quantity of
235
92 U in the naturally occurring uranium is only 0.7
percent. Now-a-days plutonium-239 and uranium-
233 are also being used as fuel.
2.
The fuel rods are placed in a substance of small
atomic weight, such as water, heavy water, carbon or
hydrocarbon etc. These substances are called
moderators. The function of these moderators is to
slow down the speed of the neutrons produced
during the fission process and to direct them towards
the fuel. Heavy water, it may be remembered, is
made of 2H I a heavy isotope of hydrogen instead of
H. The neutrons produced in the fission reaction are
very fast and energetic and are not suitable for
producing fission in reactor fuel like 235 92 U or 239 94 Puetc.
For this purpose slow neutrons are more useful. To
achieve this, moderators are used.
3.
Besides moderator there is an arrangement for the
control of number of neutrons, so that of all the
244
---

neutrons produced in fission, only one neutron
produces further fission reaction. The purpose is
achieved either by cadmium or by boron because
they have the property of absorbing fast neutrons.
The control rods made of cadmium or boron are
moved in or out of the reactor core to control the
neutrons that can initiate further fission reaction. In
this way the speed of the chain reaction is kept under
control. In case of emergency or for repair purposes
control rods are allowed to fall back into the reactor
and thus stop the chain reaction and shut down the
reactor.
Heat is produced due to chain reaction taking place in
the core of the reactor. The temperature of the core,
therefore, rises to about 500 °C. To produce steam
from this heat, it is transported to heat exchanger with
the help of water, heavy water or any other liquid
under high pressure. In the heat exchanger this heat
is used to produce high temperature steam from
ordinary water. The steam is then used to run the
turbine which in turn rotates the generator to produce
electricity. The temperature of the steam coming out
of the turbine is about 300 °C. This is further cooled to
convert it into water again. To cool this steam, water
from some river or sea is, generally, used. In Karachi
nuclear power plant (KANUP), heavy water is being
used as a moderator and for the transportation of
heat also from the reactor core to heat exchanger,
heavy water is used. To cool steam coming out of the
turbine, sea water is being used.
The nuclear fuel once used for charging the reactor can keep
on operation continuously for a few months. There after the
fissile material begins to decrease. Now the used fuel is
removed and fresh fuel is fed instead. In the used up fuel
intensely radioactive substances remain. The half-life of
these radioactive remnant materials is many thousand years.
The radiations and the particles emitted out of this nuclear
waste is very injurious and harmful to the living things.
Unfortunately there is no proper arrangement of the disposal
of the nuclear waste. This cannot be dumped into oceans or
left in any place where they will contaminate the
environment, such as through the soil or the air. They must
not be allowed to get into the drinking water. The best place
so far found to store these wastes is in the bottom of old salt
245
---

mines, which are very dry and are thousands of metres below
the surface of the Earth. Here they can remain and decay
without polluting the environment.
Types of Reactors
There are two main types of nuclear reactors. These are:
(i) Thermal reactors
(ii)
Fast reactors
Do You Knew?
The thermal reactors are called "thermal" because the
neutrons must be slowed down to "thermal energies" to
238
239
produce further fission. They use natural uranium or slightly
U
U
92
92
1
enriched uranium as fuel. Enriched uranium contains a
in
+
greater percentage of U-235 than natural uranium does.
+
There are several designs of thermal reactors. Pressurized
water reactors (PWR) are the most widely used reactors in
23.5 min
the world. In this type of reactors, the water is prevented from
ie
boiling, being kept under high pressure. This hot water is
239
used to boil another circuit of water which produces steam for
93
Np
+ a + r
turbine rotation of electricity generators.
Fast reactors are designed to make use of U-238, which is
2.4 days
about 99% content of natural uranium. Each U-238 nucleus
absorbs a fast neutron and changes to plutonium-239.
239
Pu
+0
+
235
94
U
+
'n
239 Np + B
oe
92
93
Np
239
>
93
94
Pu + LB
An induced nuclear reaction in
238
Plutonium can be fissioned by fast neutrons, hence,
which
U is transmuted into
92
moderator is not needed in fast reactors. The core of fast
the transuranium element
239
reactors consists of a mixture of plutonium and uranium
plutonium
Pu.
94
dioxide surrounded by a blanket of uranium-238.
Neutrons that escape from the core interact with uranium-
238 in the blanket, producing thereby plutonium-239. Thus
more plutonium fuel is bred in this way and natural uranium is
used more effectively.
21.10
FUSION REACTION
We know that the energy given out per nucleon per fission of
heavy element like that of uranium is 0.9 MeV. It is due to the
fact that the binding energy per nucleon of the fission
fragments is greater than uranium. In fact energy is obtained
from any nuclear reaction in which the binding energy per
nucleon of the products increases. Is there any other reaction
besides the fission reaction from which energy could be
obtained? In order to answer this question we must ponder
246
---

over Fig.21.4 again. This graph shows that the binding energy
per nucleon increases upto A = 50. Hence when two light
nuclei merge together to form a heavy nucleus whose mass
number A is less than 50, then energy is given out. In section
on "Mass Defect and Binding Energy" we have observed that
when two protons and two neutrons merge to form a helium
nucleus, then about 28 MeV energy is given out.
"Such a nuclear reaction in which two light nuclei merge
to form a heavy nucleus is called fusion reaction".
During a fusion reaction some mass is lost and its equivalent
energy is given out. In a fusion reaction, more energy per
nucleon can be obtained as compared to the fission reaction.
But unfortunately it is comparatively more difficult to produce
fusion. Two positively charged light nuclei must be brought
very close to one another. To do so work has to be done
against the electrostatic force of repulsion between the
positively charged nuclei. Thus a very large amount of
energy is required to produce fusion reaction. It is true that a
greater amount of energy can be obtained during a fusion
reaction compared to that produced during a fission reaction,
but in order to start this reaction a very large amount of
energy is spent. On the contrary no difficulty is faced to start
the fission reaction because neutron has no charge on it and
it has to face no repulsive force while reaching the nucleus.
Let us now take the example of a fusion reaction when two
deuterons are merged to form a helium nucleus, 24 MeV
energy is released during this process i.e.,
H+ }H He + 24 MeV
But there is a very little chance of the formation of He
nucleus by the merger of two deuterons. The probability of
occurring such a reaction is great where one proton or one
neutron is produced as given below:
H+ 2H + H + 4.0 MeV
or
H+ ;H + on + 3.3 MeV
In both of these reactions about 1.0 MeV energy per nucleon
is produced which is equal to the energy produced during
fission. If 2 Hand H are forced to fuse then 17.6 MeV energy
is obtained i.e.,
HH H He + + 17.6 MeV
We know that for fusion of two light nuclei the work has to be
247
---

done to overcome the repulsive force which exists between
them. For this the two nuclei are hurled towards one another
at a very high speed. One method to do so is to give these
nuclei a very large velocity with the help of an accelerator.
This method has been used in the research study of nuclear
Do You Know?
fusion of H and H But this method of nuclear fusion for
getting energy cannot be used on a large scale.
Ozone on the surface of Earth is a
There is another method to produce fusion reaction It is
corrosive and poisonous gas but at
the height of 20-50 km from the Earth
based upon the principle that the speed of atoms of a
surface becomes vital to life as it
substance increases with the increase in the temperature of
absorbs almost all U.V. radiations
that substance. To start a fusion reaction the temperature at
which are harmful to living things.
which the required speed of the light nuclei can be obtained is
about 10 million degrees celsius. At such extraordinarily high
temperature the reaction that takes place is called thermo-
nuclear reaction. Ordinarily such a high temperature cannot
be achieved. However during the explosion of am atom
bomb this temperature can be had for a very short time.
Until now the fusion reaction is taking place only in a
hydrogen bomb. That extraordinary high temperature is
obtained during the explosion of an atom bomb, due to this
high temperature the fusion reaction between H and 3 H sets
in. In this way a very large amount of energy is given out with
the explosion.
A very large amount of energy can be had from a fusion
reaction, but till now this reaction has not been brought under
control like a fission reaction and so is not being used to
For Your Information
produce electricity. Efforts are in full swing in this field and it is
hoped that in near future some method would be found to
Ultra violet radiations cause
control this reaction as well.
(i) Sunburn, blindness and skin
cancer
(ii) Severe crop damage
Nuclear Reaction in the Sun
(iii) decay of micro-organisms
(iv) disrupt the ocean ecosystem
The Sun is composed primarily of hydrogen. It has a little
amount of helium and a slight amount of other heavy
elements. A tremendous amount of energy keeps issuing out
of it continuously at all times. The temperature of its core is
about 20 million degrees celsius and its surface temperature
is about 6000 degrees celsius. Its energy is due to fusion
reaction called p-p reaction. During this process two
hydrogen nuclei or two protons fuse to from deuteron. This
reaction takes place as
H+ H HHoe + Energy
With the fusion reaction of deuteron with proton, He an
isotope of helium is formed i.e.,
248
---

H+
+
Energy
In the last stage the two nuclei of He react in the following
For Your Information
manner:
Natural
He + 2 He
He H+ + Energy
16% internal
16%
In this reaction six protons take part and finally a helium
gamma ray
nucleus and two protons are formed That is, the result of
33% radon
13% cosmic
different stages of this reaction is that four protons have
20.7% medical
formed one helium nucleus. It has been estimated that in this
p-p chain reaction, 25.7 MeV energy is given outi.e., 6,4 MeV
per nucleon energy is obtained which is much greater than
Artificial
the energy given out per nucleon (1 MeV) during a fission
0.4 % fallout
reaction.
0.4 % miscellaneous
RADIATION EXPOSURE
0.4 % occupational
21.11
0.1 % discharges
When a Geiger tube is used in any experiment, it records
Pie-chart showing proportion of
radiation even when a radioactive source is nowhere near it.
radiation from different sources
This is caused by radiation called background radiation. It is
absorbed by average person
partly due to cosmic radiation which comes to US from outer
space and partly from naturally occurring radioactive
substance in the Earth's crust. The cosmic radiation consists
of high energy charged particles and electromagnetic
radiation. The atmosphere acts as a shield to absorb some of
these radiations as well as ultraviolet rays. In recent past, the
depletion of ozone layer in the upper atmosphere has been
detected which particularly filters ultraviolet rays reaching us.
Do You Know?
This may result in increased eye and skin diseases. The
depletion of ozone layer is suspected to be caused due to
excessive release of some chemicals in the atmosphere such
as chloroflourocarbons (CFC) used in refrigeration, aerosol
spray and plastic foam industry. Its use is now being replaced
by environmentally friendly chemicals. Many building
materials contain small amounts of radioactive isotopes.
Radioactive radon gas enters buildings from the ground. It
gets trapped inside the building which makes radiation levels
much higher from radon inside than outside. A good
ventilation can reduce radon level inside the building. All
types of food also contain a little radioactive substance. The
most common are potassium-40 and carbon-14 isotopes.
This symbol is universally used to
indicate an area where radioactivity
Some radiation in the environment is added by human
is being handled or artificial radiations
are being produced
activities. Medical practices, mostly diagnostic X-ray
probably contribute the major portion to it. It is an unfortunate
fact that many X-ray exposures such as routine chest X-ray
249
---

and dental X-ray are made for no strong reason and may do
For Your Information
more harm than good. Every X-rays exposure should have a
definite justification that outweighs the risk. The other
Sources of natural radiation
sources include radioactive waste from nuclear facilities,
Cosmic
Radiation
Radioactive rocks
Suming coal
Medical
Nuclear power
in the ground
hospitals, research and industrial establishments, colour
television, luminous watches and tobacco leaves. A smoker
not only inhales toxic smoke but also hazardous radiation.
Low level background radiation from natural sources is
normally considered to be harmless. However, higher levels
of exposure are certainly damaging. We cannot avoid
exposure to radiation. However, the best advice is to avoid
unnecessary exposure to any kind of ionizing radiation.
21.12 BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION
Table 21.2
Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE)
To study the effects of radiation, we need to define some of
Radiation
RBE
the units of radiation. The strength of the radiation source is
X-rays. Y -rays and a-particles
1.0
of 30 keV or more
indicated by its activity measured in becquerel (Bq). One
a -particles of less than 30 key
1.7
Neutrons and protons below 10
becquerel is one disintegration per second. A larger unit is
10 (body)
MeV
30 (eyes)
curie (Ci) which equals 3.7 X 10 disintegrations per second
a-particies from natural
10
radioactivity
The effect of radiation on a body absorbing it relates to a
Heavy recoil nuclei
20
quantity called absorbed dose D defined as the energy E
absorbed from ionizing radiation per unit mass m of the
absorbing body.
E
D
=
(21.10)
250
---

Its SI unit is gray (Gy) defined as one joule per kilogram.
Table 21.3
1 Gy=13 Jkg
Average radiation doses from a number
An old unit is rad, an acronym for radiation absorbed dose.
of common sources of ionizing radiation
1 rad=0.01 Gy
Types of Exposure
mSv
Watching television for a year
10
Equal doses of different radiations do not produce same
Radiation from nuclear power
10
biological effect. For the same absorbed dose, a-particles
stations for a year
are 20 times more damaging than X-rays. The effect also
Wearing a radioactive luminous
30
watch for a year (now not very
depends on the part of the body absorbing the radiation. For
common)
example, neutrons are particularly more damaging to eyes
Having a chest X-ray
200
than other parts of the body. To allow this, the absorbed dose
Radiation from a brick house per
750
is multiplied by a quality factor known as relative biological
year
effectiveness or RBE (Table 21.2). The equivalent dose D. of
Maximum dose allowed to
1000
general public from artificial
any absorbed radiation is defined as the product of absorbed
sources per year
dose and RBE of the kind of radiation being absorbed.
Working for a month ima uranium
1000
mine
D. =DxRBE
(21.11)
Typical dose received by a
2500
member of the general public in
The SI unit of equivalent dose is sievert (Sv).
a year from all sources
1 Sv = 1 Gy X RBE
Maximum dose allowed to
50000
workers exposed to radiation per
An old unit, the rem is equal to 0.01 Sv.
year
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
dosage in
effect
micro sievert
The background radiation to which we are exposed, on the
average, is 2 mSv per year. Doses of 3 Sv will cause radiation
burns to the skin. For workers in the nuclear facilities or
000 000
death of 60 percent
mines, a weekly dose of 1 mSv is normally considered safe
of people exposed
(Table 21.3).
The damage from a-particles is small unless the source
enters the body. a and B-particles can cause redness and
3 000 000
sores on the skin. Some other low level radiation effects are
loss of hair, ulceration, stiffening of the lungs, and a drop in
sterility for about two
years
the white blood cells which is followed by a sickness pattern
of diarrhea, vomiting and fever known as radiation sickness
2 000 000
(Fig. 21.16). High levels of radiation may disrupt the blood
cells seriously leading to diseases such as anaemia and
temporary low fertility
leukaemia. Chromosome abnormalities or mutation may
cause delayed genetic effects such as cancer, eye cataracts
1 000 000
radiation sickness
and abnormalities in the future generations. These may
develop many years after exposure to harmful radiation.
Example 21.3: How much energy is absorbed by a man of
0
mass 80 kg who receives a lethal whole body equivalent
dose of 400 rem in the form of low energy neutrons for which
Fig 21.16 The effects of exposure to
high levels of ionizing radiation
RBE factor is 10?
251
---

Solution:
For Your Information
RBE factor = 10
D. = 400 rem = 400 X 0.01 Sv = 4 Sv
D=?
Using Eq. 21.4
D = DB = = 0.4 Gy
4 Sv
RBE
10
Since 1 Gy is 1 J kg* hence total energy absorbed by the
whole body =mD=80x0.4Gy= 32 J
It is a very small amount of thermal energy. Obviously, the
damage done by ionizing radiation has nothing to do with
thermal energy. The harmful effects arise due to disruption of
Film badge dosimeter are used to
the normal functions of the tissues in which it is absorbed.
monitor radiation received by workers
in nuclear facilities.
21.13 BIOLOGICAL AND MEDICAL USES
OF RADIATION
Radioisotopes of many elements can be made easily by
Do You Know?
bombardment with neutrons and other particles. As such
isotopes have become available and are inexpensive, their
Radioactive wastes are of three types
use in medicine, agriculture, scientific research and
i.e., high level, medium and low level.
All these wastes are dangerous for
industries has expanded tremendously.
ground water and land environment
Radioisotopes are used to find out what happens in many
complex chemical reactions and how they proceed. Similarly
in biology, they have helped in investigating into chemical
réactions that take place in plants and animals. By mixing a
small amount of radioactive isotope with fertilizer, we can
easily measure how much fertilizer is taken up by a plant
For Your Information
using radiation detector. From such measurements, farmers
know the proper amount of fertilizer to use. Through the use of
It is very difficult to dispose off
radiation-induced mutations, improved varieties of certain
radioactive waste safely due to their
long half lives e.g., 'Pu' half life is
crops such as rice, chickpea, wheat and cotton have been
24,000 years, therefore, it remains
developed. They have improved plant structure. The plants
dangerous for about 1,92,000 years.
have shown more resistance to diseases and pest, and give
better yield and grain quality. Radiation is also used to treat
cancers. Radioactive tracers and imaging devices have
helped in the understanding and diagnosis of many diseases.
Tracer Techniques
A radioactive isotope behaves in just the same way as the
normal isotope inside a living organism. But the location and
concentration of a radioactive isotope can be determined
easily by measuring the radiation it emits. Thus, a radioactive
252
---

isotope acts as an indicator or tracer that makes it possible to
follow the course of a chemical or biological process. The
Table 21.4
technique is to substitute radioactive atoms for stable atoms
Isotope
Half-life
Gamma
Example
of the same kind in a substance and then to follow the
energies of
/MeV
use
'tagged' atoms with the help of radiation detector in the
Sodium
process. Tracers are widely used in medicine to detect
15 hours
Plasma
"Na
1.37, 2.75
volume
malignant tumors and in agriculture to study the uptake of a
fertilizer by a plant. For example, if a plant is given radioactive
Iron
"Fe
45 days
1.29. 1.10
Iron in
0.19
Plasma
carbon-14, it will use it in exactly the same way as it always
uses stable carbon-12. But the carbon-14 releases
Thyroid
Technetium
8 hours
0.14
B-radiations and thus by measuring radioactivity in different
Te
uptake
scans
parts of the plant, the path taken by the carbon atoms can be
lodine
0.72, 0.64
known. This technique has helped to understand more
8 days
0.36, 0.28
Kidney
tests
0.08
elaborately the complex process of photosynthesis. The
lodine
Plasma
tracer technique was also used to identify faults in the
60 days
0.035
volume
underground pipes of the fountain system of the historical
Vein flow
Shalimar gardens of Lahore by the scientists of Pakistan
Atomic Energy Commission.
Medical Diagnostics and Therapy
Tracers are widely used in medicine to study the process of
digestion and the way chemical substances move about in
the body.
Some chemicals such as hydrogen and sodium present in
water and food are distributed uniformly throughout the body.
Certain other chemicals are selectively absorbed by certain
organs. Radio-iodine, for example, is absorbed mostly by the
thyroid gland, phosphorus by bones and cobalt by liver. They
can serve as tracers. Small quantity of low activity
radioisotope mixed with stable isotope is administered by
injection or otherwise to a patient and its location in diseased
tissue can be ascertained by means of radiation detectors.
For example, radioactive iodine can be used to check that a
person's thyroid gland is working properly. A diseased or
hyperactive gland absorbs more than twice the amount of
normal thyroid gland. A similar method can be used to study
the circulation of blood using radioactive isotope sodium-24.
Experiments on cancerous cells have shown that those cells
that multiply rapidly absorb more radiation and are more
easily destroyed than normal cells by ionizing radiation.
Radiotherapy with y-rays from cobalt-60 is often used in the
treatment of cancer. The y-rays are carefully focussed on to
the malignant tissue. Strict safety precautions are necessary
253
---

for both patient and attendant medical staff. Radioactive
iodine-131 is used to combat cancer of the thyroid gland.
Since iodine tends to collect in the thyroid gland, radioactive
isotopes lodge where they can destroy the malignant cells. In
some cases encapsulated "seeds" are implanted in the
malignant tissue for local and short ranged treatment. For
skin cancers, phosphorus-32 or strontium-90 may be used
instead. These produce B-radiation. The dose of radiation
has to be carefully controlled otherwise the radiation could do
more damage than help. Patients undergoing radiation
treatment often feel ill, because the radiation also damages
the healthy cells.
Radiography
The y-rays radiographs are used in medical diagnosis such
as internal imaging of the brain to determine precisely the
size and location of a tumor or other parts of the body. Cracks
or cavities in castings or pipes can also be detected by
scanning. Any sudden increase in count rate indicates a
cavity within the object.
The gamma camera is designed to detect y-radiations from
Fig. 21.17
sites in the body where a y-emitting isotope is located. An
image as shown in Fig. 21.17, consisting of many dots of the
y-emitting sources in the patient body is formed. The camera
can also be used to obtain a sequence of images to observe
an organ such as a kidney in action.
21.14 BASIC FORCES OF NATURE
The man has always desired to comprehend the complexity of
nature in terms of as few elementary concepts as possible.
Among his quest, in Feynman's words, has been the one for
"wheels within wheels", the task of Natural Philosophy being to
discover the inner most wheels if any such exist. A second quest
has concentrated itself with the fundamental forces, which make
the wheels go round and enmesh with one another.
Although we have been familiar with the basic forces and
about some of the basic building blocks of the matter, but
here we are going to study the modern concepts about both
of these. We know that the basic forces are:
1.
Gravitational force
2.
Magnetic force
3
Electric force
4.
Weak nuclear force
5.
Strong nuclear force
254
---

The electric and magnetic forces were unified to get an
electromagnetic force by Faraday and Maxwell, who were
For Your Information
able to prove that a current is induced in a coil whenever the
magnetic flux passing through the coil is changed; leaving
Composition of Matter
behind four fundamental forces, the strong nuclear force, the
Molecule
electromagnetic force, the weak nuclear force and the
gravitational force. These four fundamental forces of nature
have seemed for some time quite different from one another.
Despite its different effective strength, the strong nuclear
10* m
force is effective only within sub-nuclear distances and
therefore, confines the neutrons and protons within the
nucleus. The electromagnetic force is long-range and causes
all chemical reactions. It binds together atoms, molecules,
crystals, trees, buildings and you. This force acting on a
Atom
microscopic level is responsible for a variety of apparently
different macroscopic forces such as friction, cohesion and
adhesion. The weak nuclear force is short range, like the
strong nuclear force, and is responsible for spontaneous
10-10 m
breaking up of the radioactive elements. It is a sort of
repulsive force of very short range (10-17 m). It is usually
masked by the effect of the strong and electromagnetic
forces inside the nuclei. The gravitational force, like the
Nucleus
electromagnetic force, is again long range, extending upto
and beyond the remotest stars and galaxies. It keeps you, the
atmosphere and the seas fixed to the surface of the planet. It
gives rise to the ocean tides and keeps the planets moving in
10
-15
10
14
m
their orbits around the Sun.
These widely disparate properties of the four basic forces
have not stopped the scientists from finding a common cause
Neutron or Proton
for them all.
One hundred years after the unification of electric and
magnetic forces into electromagnetic force, in 1979, the
physics nobel prize was conferred on Glashow, Weinberg
10 15 m
and Abdus Slam for the unification of electromagnetic and
weak forces.
It is further expected that a strong nuclear force will
eventually unite with electroweak force to make up a single
Quark
entity resulting in the grand unified electro-nuclear force.
21.15 BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER
According to standard model of particle Physics, subatomic
particles can be classified into four groups:
Less than 10 18 m
(i) Hadrons (ii) Leptons (iii) Gauge boson (iv) Higgs boson
255
---

Table 21.5
Elementary particles are the basic building blocks of matter. All
Quarks and Antiquarks
photons and leptons are elementary particles. Hadrons are
Name
Symbol
Charge
Up
u
++e
not elementary particles but are composed of elementary
Down
d
-te
particles called quarks. It is now believed that stable matter
Strange
S
-te
can be described using six quarks, six leptons and their
Charm
C
++e
Top
t
++e
antiparticles.
Bottom
b
e
Hadrons
Antiquarks
Symbol
Charge
Hadrons are particles that experience the strong nuclear
-te
force. In addition to protons, neutrons and mesons are
++e
++e
hadrons. The particles equal in mass or greater than protons
-te
are called baryons and those lighter than protons are called
-te
++e
mesons. A pair of quark and antiquark makes a meson and 3
quarks make a baryon. It is proposed that there are six quarks,
Proton
(1) up (2) down (3) strange (4) charm (5) bottom and (6) top.
The charges on these quarks are fractional as shown in
u
Table 21.5.
A proton is assumed to be made up of two up quarks and one
down quark as shown in Fig. 21.18 (a). The neutron is
u
d
assumed to be made of one up quarks and two down quarks
as shown in Fig. 21.18 (b).
(a)
Charge
Leptons
2/3 + 2/3 1/3 = 1
Leptons are particles that do not experience strong nuclear
Neutron
force. Electrons, muons, tau and their associated neutrinos
are called leptons.
u
Guage boson
They are believed to be the exchange particles or carriers of
d
d
basic forces of nature. For example, photons are the carriers
of electromagnetic force, the gluons glue the quarks in the
(b)
protons and neutrons and hold the nucleus together. The W*,
Charge
W and Z bosons are the exchange particles of elctro weak
2/3 1/3 1/3 = 0
Fig. 21.18
force. Currently, the standard model does not explain the
gravity or its associated particle graviton.
Higgs boson
Higgs boson, discovered in July, 2012, provides an
explanation for how the other particles get mass by interacting
with it.
256
---

SUMMARY
The combined number of all the protons and neutrons in a nucleus is known as
mass number and is denoted by A.
The protons and neutrons present in the nucleus are called nucleons.
The number of neutrons present in a nucleus is called its neutron number and is
denoted by N.
The number of protons inside a nucleus or the number of electrons outside of the
nucleus is called the atomic number or the charge number of an atom and is
denoted by Z.
Isotopes are such nuclei of an element that have the same charge number Z, but
have different mass numberA.
The emission of radiations (a, B and Y ) form elements having charge number Z
greater than 82 is called radioactivity.
The change of an element into a new element due to emission of radiations is
called radioactive decay. The original element is called parent element and the
element formed due to this decay is called daughter element
Half-life of a radioactive element is that period in which half of the atoms of the
parent element decay into daughter element.
Such a reaction is which a heavy nucleus like uranium splits up into two nuclei of
equal size along with the emission of energy during reaction is called fission
reaction.
Such a nuclear reaction in which two light nuclei merge to form a heavy nucleus
along with the emission of the energy is called fusion reaction.
The strength of the radiation source is indicated by its activity measured in
becquerel. 'One becquerel (Bq) is one disintegration per second. A large unit is
curie (Ci) which equals 3.7x1010 disintegrations per second.
The effect of radiation on a body absorbing it relates to a quantity called absorbed
dose D defined as the energy E absorbed from ionizing radiation per unit mass m
of the absorbing body.
The basic forces are:
i.
Gravitational force
ii.
Electromagnetic force
iii.
Weak nucleus force
iv.
The strong force
Subatomic particles are classified into four groups:
i.
Hadrons
ii.
Leptons
iii.
Gauge boson
iv.
Higgs boson
Elementary particles are the basic building blocks of matter.
257
---

QUESTIONS
21.1
What are isotopes? What do they have in common and what are their differences?
21.2
Why are heavy nuclei unstable?
21.3
If a nucleus has a half-life of 1 year, does this mean that it will be completely
decayed after 2 years? Explain.
21.4
What fraction of a radioactive sample decays after two half-lives have elapsed?
21.5
The radioactive element 226 88 Ra has a half-life of 1.6 X 10 years. Since the Earth is
about 5 billion years old, how can you explain why we still can find this
element in nature?
21.6
Describe a brief account of interaction of various types of radiations with matter.
21.7
Explain how a and B-particles may ionize an atom without directly hitting the
electrons? What is the difference in the action of the two particles for producing
ionization?
21.8 Aparticle which produces more ionization is less penetrating. Why?
21.9 What information is revealed by the length and shape of the tracks of an incident
particle in Wilson cloud chamber?
21.10 Why must a Geiger Muller tube for detecting u-particles have a very thin end
window? Why does a Geiger Muller tube for detecting y-rays not need a window at
all?
21.11 Describe the principle of operation of a solid state detector of ionizing radiation in
terms of generation and detection of charge carriers.
21.12 What do we mean by the term critical mass?
21.13 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of nuclear power compared to the use
of fossil fuel generated power.
21.14 What factors make a fusion reaction difficult to achieve?
21.15 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of fission power from the point of
safety, pollution and resources.
21.16 What do you understand by "background radiation"? State two sources of this
radiation.
21.17
If someone accidently swallows an a-source and a B-source
which would be the more dangerous to him? Explain why?
21.18
Which radiation dose would deposit more energy to the body (a) 10 mGy to the
hand, or (b) 1 mGy dose to the entire body.
21.19 What is a radioactive tracer? Describe one application each in medicine, agriculture
and industry.
21.20 How can radioactivity help in the treatment of cancer?
258
---

PROBLEMS
21.1
Find the mass defect and the binding energy for tritium, if the atomic mass of tritium
is 3.016049 u.
(Ans: 0.00857 u, 7.97 MeV)
21.2
The half-life of 973 Sr is 9.70 hours. Find its decay constant.
(Ans: 1.99 x 10's)
38
21.3
The element2344 Pa is unstable and decays by B-emission with a half-life 6.66 hours.
state the nuclear reaction and the daughter nuclei.
(Ans:
24 U)
21.4 Find the energy associated with the following reaction: (Mass of H=1.00784 u)
1,N+ 1He
What does negative sign indicate?
(Ans: 1.12 MeV)
21.5
Determine the energy associated with the following reaction: (mass of "C=14.0077u)
CC
(Ans: 3.77 MeV)
21.6
If 233 92 U decays twice by a-emission, what is the resulting isotope?
(Ans: 225 Rn)
21.7
Calculate the energy (in MeV) released in the following fusion reaction:
H+3,H He + on
(Ans: 17.6 MeV/event)
21.8 A sheet of lead 5.0 mm thick reduces the intensity of a beam of y-rays by a factor 0.4.
Find half value thickness of lead sheet which will reduce the intensity to half of its
initial value.
(Ans: 3.79mm)
21.9
Radiation from a point source obeys the inverse square law. If the count rate at a
distance of 1.0 m from Geiger counter is 360 counts per minute, what will be its count
rate at 3.0 m from the source?
(Ans: 40 counts per min.)
21.10 A 75 kg person receives a whole body radiation dose of 24 m-rad, delivered by
a-particles for which RBE factor is 12. Calculate (a) the absorbed energy in joules,
and (b) the equivalent dose in rem.
[Ans: (a) 18 mJ (b) 0.29 rem]
Note: Consult the table on page 222, where required, for atomic masses.
259
---

GLOSSARY
Alternating Current
Current produced by a voltage source whose polarity
keeps on reversing with time
Amorphous
Those solids in which arrangement of atoms or
molecules are not regular
Amplifier
A device that increases the output of electrical signal
fed as input
Atomic Number
The number of protons in the nucleus
Binding Energy
The work done on the nucleus to separate it into its
constituent neutrons and protons
Black Body
A body that absorbs all the radiations incident upon it
Bulk Modulus
Ratio of applied stress to volumetric strain
Capacitor
A device that can store charge
Cathode ray
High speed graph plotting device
Oscilloscope
Compton effect
An increase in the wavelength of X-rays when
scattered by bound electrons
Crystalline Solids
Substances having regular arrangement of atoms or
molecules
Current
A device which converts mechanical energy into
Generator
electrical energy
Digital System
It deals with only those quantides which have only two
discrete values
Elastic limit
The limit beyond which the sample becomes
permanently deformed
Electric Current
Rate of flow of electric charge
Electric Field
Electric field force per unit charge at a point
Intensity
260
---

Electric Flux
Number of electric field lines passing through certain
surface element
Electric Potential
Amount of work done in bringing a unit positive charge
from infinity to a point
Electrolysis
Conduction of electricity due to chemical reaction in
liquids
Electromagnetic
Waves which do not require any medium for their
Waves
propagation
Electromotive
A measure of the energy supplied by a source of
Force
electric current per unit charge
Electron volt
Unit of energy equals to 1.6*10*19. J
Electroplating
Electric metallic coating
Forward Bias
Bias volta ge which when applied to a p - n junction
produce large current flow
Frequency
Number of cycles per unit time
Fusion
Such nuclear reaction in which two light nuclei merge
to form a heavy nucleus with the emission of energy
Half life
It is the period in which half of the radioactive element
atoms decay
Holography
A method of recording three dimensional image
Impedance
Combined effect of resistances and reactances in an
A.C. circuit
Inductance
The phenomenon in which changing current in a coil
produces an emf in itself
Inertial frame of
Coordinate system in which the law of inertia is valid
reference
Insulators
A material with a very high electrical resistivity
Ionization Potential The energy needed to remove the electron from an
atom or molecule to infinite distance
261
---

Laser
Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation
Logic Gate
Electronic circuits which implements various logic
operations
Magnetic Induction
Magnetization of a substance by an external magnetic
field
Mass Defect
It is the difference between the mass of the separated
nucleons and the combined mass of the nucleus
Mass Number
Total number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus
Modulation
The process of combining the low frequency signal
with a high frequency radio wave
Mutual Inductance
A phenomenon in which a changing current in one coil
produces emf in other coil
NAVASTAR
Navigation system based on Einstein theory of
relativity
Nuclear Energy
Energy derived from nuclear reactions either by fission
or by fusion
Nuclear fission
Disintegration of atomic nucleus into two or more
fragments with the emission of huge amount of energy
Nuclear Reactor
A device in which controlled nuclear fission reaction
takes place
Nucleons
Protons and neutron in the nucleus,
Pair Production
Production of electron-position pair from a photon
Photo voltaic cell
A device that detects or measures electromagnetic
radiation by generating a potential at a junction
Photodiode
A device used to detect light falling on it
Photoelectric
Emission of electrons from metallic surface when
Effect
exposed to electromagnetic radiations
Plastic deformation A permanent deformation of a solid object to an
applied stress
262
---

Polymeric Solids
The solid materials with a structure that is in termediate
between ordered and disordered structure
Rectification
Conversion of alternating current into direct current
Resistivity
Tendency of material to oppose the flow of current
Reverse Bias
Bias voltage which when applied to a p - n junction
produces a very small or no current flow
Spectrograph
An instrument for producing photographic record of
spectrum
Spectroscopy
The investigation of wavelength and intensities of
electromagnetic radiations emitted or absorbed by the
atoms
Strain
The change produced in the size or shape of the body
by applying a stress
Stress
Force per unit area
Super Conductors
Those material whose resistivity becomes zero below
a critical temperature
Thermistor
Heat sensitive resistor
Time Period
That interval during which the voltage source changes
its polarity once
Transformer
A device which converts high A.C. voltage to low A.C.
voltage or low A.C. voltage to high A. C. voltage
Transistor
Semi conducting material to which at least three
electrical contacts are made
Ultimate tensile
The maximum stress that a material can withstand
stress
Young's Modulus
Ratio of the tensile stress applied to the material to the
resulting tensile strain
263
---

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
College Physic by Harris Benson
2.
Physics for Scientist and Engineers by Raymond A. Serway.
3.
Physics Concepts and Applications by Jerry Wilson.
4.
The Ideas of Physics by Douglas G. Giancoli.
5.
Conceptual Physics by Paul G. Hewitt.
6.
College Physic by Robert. L.Weber.
7.
Cambridge Physics by Jones and Marchington
8.
Principles of Physics by F.J. Bueche and David A. Jerde.
9.
Fundamentals of Physics by David Holliday, Robert Resnik and Jearl Walker.
10.
Advanced Physics by Jonathan Ling.
11.
College Physics by Sears, Zemansky and Young.
12.
Fundamentals of College Physics by Peter J Nolan.
13.
Physics by Robert Hutchings.
14.
Nuffield Physics by Geoffery Dorling.
15.
Advanced level Physics by Nelkon and Parker.
16.
Advanced Physics by T. Duncan.
17.
Understanding Physics by Pople.
18.
Fundamental of Physics by Tahir Hussain.
19.
Physics for Advanced Level by Jim Breithhaupt.
20.
College Physics by Vincent P. Coletta.
21.
Physics by J.B. Marion.
22.
Physics by Atam P. Arya.
23.
Contemporary College Physics by E. R. Jones and R. L. Childers.
24.
Physics by John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson,
25.
Physics by Kane and Sternhein.
264
---

INDEX
A
Capacitance
22
Capacitor
22
A.C. generator
97-99
Absorbed dose
250
CAT Scanar
211
Characteristic X-rays
209-210
Alpha particles
226
111
Choke
128
Alternating current
Ammeter
74
Collector
159
Amorphous solid
Comparator
166-167
136
Compressional stress
138
Ampere's law
61-62
Amplitude modulation
131
Compressive strain
138
AND gate
168
Compton effect
190-191
Compton shift
190-191
AND Operation
168
Annihilation of matter
192-193
Compton wavelength
190-191
Conductance
38
Atomic nucleus
220
220
Conduction band
143
Atomic number
Avometer
76
Conductors
143-144
Conventional current
32
B
Core
244
Balmer series
203
256
Coresivity
150
Baryons
249
Base
159
Cosmic radiation
Coulomb's law
2
Basic forces
254-255
250
Critical mass
242-243
Becqueral
Critical temperature
146
Beta particles
226
223
Crystalline solid.
136
Binding energy
183
Curie
250
Black body
Current gain
160
Black body radiation
182-183
204-205
D
Bohr's atomic model
Bohr's orbit
205
D.C. generator
100-101
D.C. motor
102
Boolean variable
168
Brackett series
204
Daughter element
230
194-195
Dead beat galvanometer
74
Bragg's equation
de-Broglie relation
193
Bremsstrahlung
210
Brittle substances
140
Decay constant
230
Building block of matter
255-256
Depeletion region
154
Deuterium
221
Bulk modulus
139
Deutron
221
C
68-70
Diamagnetic substances
148
C.R.O.
265
---

Dielectric constant
24
G
Digital multimeter
77-78
Gain
Digital system
164-165
167-168
Galvanometer
Domains
71-74
148-149
Ductile substances
Gamma rays
226-227
140
Geiger Muller counter
E
235-237
General theory of relativity
178
e.m.f.
43-44
Gray
251
Einstein photo electric equation
188
Guass's law
12
Elastic deformation
140
H
Electric current
32
Hadrons
Electric field strength
256
7
Half life
Electric flux
229
9-10
Half wave rectification
Electric intensity
156
5
He-Ne laser
Electric polarization
215
24-25
Henery
Electric potential
92-94
15
Holography
216
Electromagnet
149
Hooke's law
140
Electromagnetic spectrum
185
Hydrogen emission spectrum
Electromagnetic waves
207-208
128-129
Hysteresis
Electron microscope
150
197
Electron volt
Hysteresis loop
148-150
19
Hysteresis loss
Emitter
150
159
I
Energy band theory
143-144
Impedance
Energy density
120
96
Induced current
Energy-mass relation
82-84
180-181
Induced e.m.f.
Equivalent dose
82-84
251
Inertial frame of reference
Excitation potential
177
207
Insulators
Extrinsic semiconductor
143-144
144
Intrinsic semiconductor
F
144
Farad
lonization energy
207
22
lonization potential
207
Faraday's law
87
Isotopes
Fast reactor
221
246
K
Ferromagnetic materials
148
Kirchhoff's first law
Fission chain reaction
46
242
Kirchhoff's second law
Fluorescence
47
233
L
Forbidden energy gap
143
Laser
Forward resistance
213
155
Frame of reference
Leakage current
155
177
Frequency modulation
Length contraction
179
131-132
Full wave rectification
Lenz's law
88
157
Fussion reaction
Leptons
256
247
Light emitting diode
157
266
---

Linear absorption co-efficient
233
Operational amplifier
162-163
Lyman series
203
OR gate
168
M
OR operation
168
Magnetic dipole
148
P
Magnetic flux
60
p - n junction
154
Magnetic flux density
60-61
Pair production
192
Mass defect
223
Parent element
227
Mass spectrograph
222-223
Paschen series
204
Mass variation
180
Pfund series
204
Measurement of e/m
66-67
Photo diode
158
Mesons
256
Photo electron
187
Millikan's method
20-21
Photo electron
187
Moderator
244
Photo voltaic cell
158
Modulation
131
Photocell
189
Modulus of elasticity
139
Photoelectric effect
187-189
Motional e.m.f.
84
Photon
185
Mutual inductance
90-91
Plancks constant
184
N
Plastic deformation
140
NAND gate
169
Plasticity
140
NAND operation
169
Polymeric solids
136-137
NAVASTAR Navigation system
180
Population inversion
214
NAVASTAR
180
Positron
192
Night switch
171
Potentiometer
51-52
Non-intertial frame of reference
178
Principle quantum number
204
NOR gate
169
Proportional limit
140
NOR operation
169
Protium
221
NOT gate
169
Q
NOT operation
169
Quantized energy
206
n-p-n transistor
159
Quantized radii
206
Nuclear fission
240
Quarks
256
Nuclear power station
243-245
R
Nuclear reaction
238-239
Radiation absorbed dose
251
Nuclear reactor
243-246
Radiation detector
234-237
Nuclear transmutation
227-228
Radiation exposure
249-250
Nucleon number
220
Radiation sickness
251
o
Radioactive decay
227
Ohm
37
Radioactive elements
226
Ohm meter
76-77
Radioactivity
226
Ohm's law
36
Radiography
254
Open loop gain
163
Rectification
156
267
---

Relative biological effectiveness 251
T
Relative motion
177
Tensile strain
138
Rem
251
Tensile stress
138
Resistivity
38
Thermal reactor
246
Resonance
125
Thermistor
42
Retantivity
150
Threshold frequency
188
Rheostat
41
Time dilation
179
Right hand rule
57
Tracer techniques
252-253
Rutherford atomic model
220
Transformer
103-106
Rydberg constant
203, 208
Transistor
159
S
Tritium
221
Saturation
150
U
Self inductance
93
Ultimate tensile strength
140
Self quenching
236
Uncertainty principle
197-199
Semiconductors
143
Unified mass
220
Sensors
170-171
Uses of laser
215-216
Shear modulus
139
V
Shear strain
139
Voltage gain
161-162
Shear stress
138
Voltmeter
2
75
Sievert
251
Volumetric strain
138-139
Solid state detector
237
W
Special theory of relativity
178-181
Wave particle duality
195-196
Spectral series
203
Weber
60
Spectroscopy
202
Wheatstone bridge
50-51
Step down transformer
104
Wilson cloud chamber
234-235
Step up transformer
104
Work function
188
Stephan Boltzmann's law
184
x
Stephan's constant
184
Stimulated absorption
Xerography
8-9
213
Stimulated emission
XNOR gate
170
213
Stopping potential
XNOR operation
170
187
Strain
XOR gate
169-170
138
Stress
XOR operation
169
138
Stress-strain curve
X-rays
209-211
140
Y
Superconductor
146-147
Young's modulus
139
268
---