
Chapter 19
DAWN OF MODERN PHYSICS
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter the students will be able to:
1.
Distinguish between inertial and non-inertial frames of references.
2.
Describe the postulates of special theory of relativity and its results.
3.
Understand the NAVASTAR navigation system.
4.
Understand the concept of black body radiation.
5.
Understand and describe how energy is distributed over the wavelength range for
several values of source temperature.
6.
Know Planck's assumptions.
7.
Know the origin of quantum theory.
8.
Show an appreciation of the particle nature of electromagnetic radiation.
9.
Describe the phenomenon of photoelectric effect.
10.
Explain photoelectric effect in terms of photon energy and work function.
11.
Explain the function of photocell and describe its uses.
12.
Describe Compton's effect.
13.
Explain the phenomena of pair production and pair annihilation.
14.
Describe de-Broglie's hypothesis of wave nature of particles.
15.
Describe and interpret qualitatively the evidence provided by electron diffraction for
the wave nature of particles.
16.
Understand the working principle of electron microscope.
17.
Understand and describe uncertainty principle.
the early part of the twentieth century, many experimental and theoretical problems
remained unresolved. Attempts to explain the behaviour of matter on the atomic level with
the laws of classical physics were not successful. Phenomena such as black body radiation,
the photoelectric effect, the emission of sharp spectral lines by atoms in a gas discharge
tube, and invariance of speed of light, could not be understood within the framework of
classical physics. To explain these observations a revolutionary framework of explanation
was necessary which we call modern physics. Its two most significant features are relativity
and quantum theory. The observations on objects moving very fast, approaching the speed
of light, are well explained by the special theory of relativity. Quantum theory has been able
to explain the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation as discrete packets of energy and the
particles on a very small scale are dominated by wave properties.
Classical physics is still valid in ordinary processes of everyday life. But to explain the
behaviour of tiny or very fast moving particles, we have to use the above mentioned
theories. In this chapter, we shall discuss various aspects of theory of relativity and quantum
175
---

theory. Before introducing special theory of relativity, some
related terms are discussed briefly.
19.1 RELATIVE MOTION
When we say a ball is thrown up, the 'up' direction is only for
that particular place. It will be 'down' position for a person on
the diametrically opposite side of the globe. The concept of
direction is purely relative. Similarly, the rest position or the
motion of an object is not same for different observers. For
example, the walls of the cabin of a moving train are
stationary with respect to the passengers sitting inside it but
are in motion to a person stationary on the ground. So we
cannot say whether an object is absolutely at rest or
absolutely in motion. All motions are relative to a person or
instrument observing it.
Let us perform an experiment in two cars moving with
constant velocities in any direction. Suppose a ball is thrown
straight up. It will come back straight down. This will happen in
both cars. But if a person in one car observes the experiment
done in the other car, will he observe the same? Suppose now
one car is stationary. The person in the other car, which is
moving with constant velocity, throws a ball straight up. He will
receive the ball straight down. On the other hand, the fellow
sitting in the stationary car observes that the path of the ball is
a parabola. Thus, when experimenters observe what is going
on in their own frame of reference, the same experiment gives
identical observations. But if they look into other frames, they
observe differently.
19.2 FRAMES OF REFERENCE
We have discussed the most commonly used Cartesian
coordinate system. In effect, a frame of reference is any
coordinate system relative to which measurements are taken.
The position of a table in a room can be located relative to the
walls of the room. The room is then the frame of reference.
For measurements taken in the college laboratory, the
laboratory is the reference frame. If the same experiment is
performed in a moving train, the train becomes a frame of
reference. The position of a spaceship can be described
relative to the positions of the distant stars. A coordinate
system based on these stars is then the frame of reference.
An inertial frame of reference is defined as a coordinate
system in which the law of inertia is valid. That is, a body at
176
---

rest remains at rest unless an unbalanced force produces
acceleration in it. Other laws of nature also apply in such a
system. If we place a body upon Earth it remains at rest
unless an unbalanced force is applied upon it. This
observation shows that Earth may be considered as an
inertial frame of reference. A body placed in a car moving with
a uniform velocity with respect to Earth also remains at rest,
so that car is also an inertial frame of reference. Thus any
frame of reference which is moving with uniform velocity
relative to an inertial frame is also an inertial frame.
When the moving car is suddenly stopped, the body placed in
it, no longer remains at rest. So is the case when the car is
suddenly accelerated. In such a situation, the car is not an
inertial frame of reference. Thus an accelerated frame is a
non-inertial frame of reference. Earth is rotating and
revolving and hence strictly speaking, the Earth is not an
inertial frame. But it can often be treated as an inertial frame
without serious error because of very small acceleration.
19.3 SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
The theory of relativity is concerned with the way in which
observers who are in a state of relative motion describe
physical phenomena. The special theory of relativity treats
problems involving inertial or non-accelerating frames of
reference. There is another theory called general theory of
Do You Know?
relativity which treats problems involving frames of reference
accelerating with respect to one another. The special theory
of relativity is based upon two postulates, which can be
stated as follows:
1. The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames.
2. The speed of light in free space has the same value for all
observers, regardless of their state of motion.
The speed of light emitted by
flashlight is c measured by two
The first postulate is the generalization of the fact that all
observers, one on the moving track
and the other on the road.
physical laws are the same in frames of reference moving with
uniform velocity with respect to one another. If the laws of
physics were different for different observers in relative motion,
the observer could determine from this difference that which of
them were stationary in a space and which were moving. But
such a distinction does not exist, so this postulate implies that
there is no way to detect absolute uniform motion. The second
postulate states an experimental fact that speed of light in free
space is the universal constant 'c' (c = 3 X 108 ms"). These
simple postulates have far-reaching consequences. These
177
---

include such phenomena as the slowing down of clocks and
contraction of lengths in moving reference frames as
measured by a stationary observer. Some interesting results
of the special theory of relativity can be summarized as
follows without going into their mathematical derivations.
Time Dilation
According to special theory of relativity, time is not absolute
quantity. It depends upon the motion of the frame of
reference.
Suppose an observer is stationary in an inertial frame. He
measures the time interval between two events in this frame.
Let it be to. This is known as proper time. If the observer is
moving with respect to frame of events with velocity V or if the
frame of events is moving with respect to observer with a
uniform velocity V, the time measured by the observer would
not be to. but it would be t given by
t =
to
v2
(19.1)
c2
As the
quantity 1 2 2 is always less than one, so t is greater
than to i.e., time has dilated or stretched due to relative motion
of the observer and the frame of reference of events. This
astonishing result applies to all timing processes - physical,
chemical and biological. Even aging process of the human
body is slowed by motion at very high speeds.
Length Contraction
The distance from Earth to a star measured by an observer in
a moving spaceship would seem smaller than the distance
measured by an observer on Earth. That is, if you are in
motion relative to two points that are a fixed distance apart,
the distance between the two points appears shorter than if
you were at rest relative to them. This effect is known as
length contraction. The length contraction happens only
along the direction of motion. No such contraction would be
observed perpendicular to the direction of motion. The length
of an object or distance between two points measured by an
observer who is relatively at rest is called proper length " If
an object and an observer are in relative motion with speed V,
then the contracted length 'e' is given by
178
---

(19.2)
Mass Variation
According to special theory of relativity, mass of an object is a
varying quantity and depends upon the speed of the object.
An object whose mass when measured at rest is m. will have
an increased mass m when observed to be moving at speed
V. They are related by
mo
m =
(19.3)
c2
The increase in mass indicates the increase in inertia the
object has at high speeds. As V approaches C, it requires a
larger and larger force to change the speed of the object.
As
therefore 1-23
0
Thus
m x
An infinite mass would require an infinite force to accelerate
it. Because infinite forces are not available, hence, an object
cannot be accelerated to the speed of light'c in free space.
In our everyday life, we deal with extremely small speeds,
compared to the speed of light. Even the Earth's orbital speed
is only 30 kms On the other hand, the speed of light in free
space is 300,000 kms1. This is the reason why Newton's laws
are valid in everyday situations. However, when
experimenting with atomic particles moving with velocities
approaching speed of light, the relativistic effects are very
prominent, and experimental results cannot be explained
without taking Einstein's equations into account.
Energy 1 Mass Relation
According to special theory of relativity, mass and energy are
different entities but are interconvertible. The total energy E
and mass m of an object are related by the expression
=mc2
(19.4)
where m depends on the speed of the object. At rest, the
energy equivalent of an object's mass m. is called rest mass
energy Eo.
179
---

E.=m.c2
(19.5)
As mc2 is greater than m.c2, the difference of energy
(mc2-m.c2) is due to motion, as such it represents the kinetic
energy of the mass. Hence
K.E. = (m-m.)c2
(19.6)
From equation 19.4 above, the change in mass m due to
change in energy AE is given by
Am-AE
Because c2 is a very large quantity, this implies that small
changes in mass require very large changes in energy. In our
everyday world, energy changes are too small to provide
measurable mass changes. However, energy and mass
changes in nuclear reactions are found to be exactly in
accordance with the above mentioned equations.
NAVSTAR Navigation System
The results of special theory of relativity are put to practical
use even in everyday life by a modern system of navigation
satellites called NAVSTAR. The location and speed
anywhere on Earth can now be determined to an accuracy of
about 2 cms1. However, if relativity effects are not taken into
account, speed could not be determined any closer than
about 20 cms1. Using these results the location of an aircraft
after an hour's flight can be predicted to about 50 m as
compared to about 760 m determined by without using
relativistic effects.
Example 19.1: The period of a pendulum is measured to be
3.0 S in the inertial reference frame of the pendulum. What is
its period measured by an observer moving at a speed of
0.95 C with respect to the pendulum?
Solution:
t=3.0 S, = 0.95 t=?
Using
t
=
C2
3.0
3.0
t =
9.6s
(0.95c)
1-(0.95)2
c2
180
---

Example 19.2: A bar 1.0 m in length and located along
x-axis moves with a speed of 0.75 C with respect to a
stationary observer. What is the length of the bar as
measured by the stationary observer?
Solution:
l==1.0m,
Using
l =
Example 19.3: Find the mass m of a moving object with
speed 0.8 C.
Solution:
Using
may
or
m =
or
m=1.67mg
19.4 BLACKBODYRADIATION
small
When a body is heated, it emits radiation. The nature of
hole
radiation depends upon the temperature. At low temperature, a
body emits radiation which is principally of long wavelengths in
the invisible infrared region. At high temperature, the proportion
of shorter wavelength radiation increases. Furthermore, the
amount of emitted radiation is different for different
wavelengths. It is of interest to see how the energy is distributed
among different wavelengths at various temperatures. For
example, when platinum wire is heated, it appears dull red at
about 500 °C, changes to cherry red at 900°C, becomes orange
internal
incident
red at 1100°C, yellow at 1300°C and finally white at about
cavity
radiation
1600°C. This shows that as the temperature is increased, the
radiation becomes richer in shorter wavelengths.
(a) Absorption of radiation
In order to understand the distribution of radiation emitted from
Fig. 19.1
a hot body, we consider a non-reflecting object such as a solid
181
---

that has a hollow cavity within it. It has a small hole and the
radiation can enter or escape only through this hole. The
small
hole
inside is blackened with soot to make it as good an absorber
and as bad a reflector as possible. The small hole appears
black because the radiation that enters is reflected from the
inside walls many times and is partly absorbed at each
reflection until none remains. Such a body is termed as black
body and has the property to absorb all the radiation entering
it. A black body is both an ideal absorber (Fig. 19.1 a) and an
ideal radiator (Fig. 19.1 b).
Intensity Distribution Diagram
internal
emerging
cavity
radiation
Lummer and Pringsheim measured the intensity of emitted
energy with wavelength radiated from a black body at
(b)
Emission of radiation
different temperatures by the apparatus shown in Fig. 19.2.
Fig. 19.1
The amount of radiation emitted with different wavelengths is
shown in the form of energy distribution curves for each
temperature in the Fig. 19.3.
black body cavity
For Your Information
region of
furnace
visible
spectrum
rock salt
T=1650 K
thermopile
prism (transmits
(radiation detector)
and disperses all
wavelengths)
infrared
1450 K
spectrometer
Fig. 19.2
These curves reveal the following interesting facts.
1260 K
1000 K
1. At a given temperature, the energy is not uniformly
distributed in the radiation spectrum of the body.
2.
At a given temperature T, the emitted energy has
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
maximum value for a certain wavelength Amax and the
Wavelength
Fig 19.3
product x Tremains constant
Results of Lummer and
Pringsheim's experiments: graphs of
x T = Constant
intensity of radiated energy against
(19.7)
wavelength from a blackbody
The value of the constant known as Wien's constant is
about 2.9 X 10 m K. This equation means that as T
182
---

increases, Amax shifts to shorter wavelength.
3.
For all wavelengths, an increase in temperature causes
an increase in energy emission. The radiation intensity
increases with increase in wavelengths and at a
particular wavelength Amex , it has a maximum value. With
further increase in wavelength, the intensity decreases.
4
The area under each curve represents the total energy
(E) radiated per second per square metre over all
wavelengths at a particular temperature. It is found that
area is directly proportional to the fourth power of kelvin
temperature T. Thus
E x T4
or
E=OT'
(19.8)
where o is called Stefen's constant. Its value is 5.67 X 10
Wm2 and the above relation is known as Stefen-
Boltzmann law.
Planck's Assumption
Electromagnetic wave theory of radiation cannot explain the
energy distribution along the intensity-wavelengths curves.
The successful attempts to explain the shape of energy
distribution curves gave rise to a new and
non-classical view of electromagnetic radiation. In 1900, Max
Planck founded a mathematical model resulting in an
equation that describes the shape of observed curves
exactly. He suggested that energy is radiated or absorbed in
discrete packets, called quanta rather than as a continuous
wave. Each quantum is associated with radiation of a single
frequency. The energy E of each quantum is proportional to
its frequency f, and
E=hf
(19.9)
where h is Planck's constant. Its value is 6.63x10-34 Js. This
fundamental constant is as important in physics as the
constant C, the speed of light in vacuum.
Max Planck received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1918 for
his discovery of energy quanta.
The Photon
Planck suggested that as matter is not continuous but
consists of a large number of tiny particles, so is the radiation
energy from a source. He assumed that granular nature of
183
---

radiation from hot bodies was due to some property of the
atoms producing it. Einstein extended his idea and
postulated that packets or tiny bundles of energy are integral
part of all electromagnetic radiation and that they could not
be subdivided. These indivisible tiny bundles of energy he
called photons. The beam of light with wavelength a consists
of stream of photons travelling at speed C and carries energy
hf. From the theory of relativity momentum p of the photon is
related to energy as
E =pc
(19.10)
Thus
pc = hf
or p = hf C h
(19.11)
The table 19.1 relates the quanta emitted in different regions
of the electromagnetic spectrum with energy. At the high end,
Y- radiation with energy - 1 MeV is easily detected as quanta
by a radiation detector and counter. At the other end, the
energy of photon of radio waves is only about 10-10 eV. So
millions of photons are needed to detect a signal and hence
wave properties of radio waves predominate. The quanta are
Table: 19.1 Electromagnetic spectrum
Frequency, H2
Wavelength. in
1025
10
1032
400 mm
10
18
Gamma rays
10
IUMI
10
10th
450
10th
X rays
10
10
1 nm
1012
10
10th
Ultraviolet
10"
500
10th
VISIBLE
10
I am
104
10
totà
Infrared
10
350
10th
10
à
10"
Microwaves
10
I em
18"
Short radio waves
10
600
10°
I
10th
Television and FM radio
10
10
AM radio
102
10
650
10th
1 km
10°
10th
10th
Long radio waves
10°
18°
700
10th
182
10"
10
184
---

so close together in energy value that radio waves are
detected as continuous radiation.
The emission or absorption of energy in steps may be
extended to include any system such as a mass oscillating on
a spring. However, the energy steps are far too small to be
detected and so any granular nature is invisible. Quantum
effects are only important when observing atomic sized
objects, where h is a significant factor in any detectable
energy change.
Example 19.4: Assuming you radiate as does a blackbody
at your body temperature about 37 °C, at what wavelength do
you emit the most energy?
Solution:
T = 37 °C = 310K
Wien's constant = 2.9x10~3 mk
7-max = ?
Using Max x T=Constant
m = 9.35 um
The radiation lies in the invisible infrared region and is
independent of skin colour.
Example 19.5: What is the energy of a photon in a beam of
infrared radiation of wavelength 1240 nm?
Solution:
a = 1240 nm
E = ?
Using
E =hf=h
E 6.63x10-34 Jsx3x108 ms 1.6x10-19
J
124010-9 m
or
E = 1.0 eV
19.5 INTERACTION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC
RADIATION WITH MATTER
Electromagnetic radiation or photons interact with matter in
three distinct ways depending mainly on their energy. The
three processes are
185
---

(i) Photoelectric effect
(ii) Compton effect
(iii) Pair production
incident
light
Photoelectric Effect
X
The emission of electrons from a metal surface when
colour
exposed to light of suitable frequency is called the
filter
photoelectric effect. The emitted electrons are known as
photoelectrons.
The photoelectric effect is demonstrated by the apparatus
shown in Fig. 19.4. An evacuated glass tube X contains two
th
electrodes. The electrode A connected to the positive
Fig 102
Experimental arrangement
terminal of the battery is known as anode. The electrode C
to observe photoelectric effect.
connected to negative terminal is known as cathode. When
monochromatic light is allowed to shine on cathode, it begins
to emit electrons. These photoelectrons are attracted by the
positive anode and the resulting current is measured by an
ammeter. The current stops when light is cut off, which
Photoelectric
proves, that the current flows because of incident light. This
current
421
current is, hence, called photoelectric current. The maximum
1.
energy of the photoelectrons can be determined by reversing
13
the connection of the battery in the circuit i.e., now the anode
I,
A is negative and cathode C is at positive potential. In this
condition the photoelectrons are repelled by the anode and
&
V2
0
the photoelectric current decreases. If this potential is made
-V
+V
more and more negative, at a certain value, called stopping
potential Vo. the current becomes zero. Even the electrons of
Fig 19.5 Characteristic curves of
maximum energy are not able to reach collector plate. The
photocurrent vs. applied voltage for
maximum energy of photoelectrons is thus
two intensities of monochromatic
light.
1
mvmax=V.e
(19.11)
2
where m is mass, vis velocity and e is the charge on electron.
4
If the experiment is repeated with light beam of higher
4>1
intensity, the amount of current increases but the current
stops for the same value of Vo. The Fig. 19.5 shows two
f,
curves of photoelectric current as a function of potential V
-V
0
V
where I2 > I If, however, the intensity is kept constant and
experiment is performed with different frequencies of
Fig 19.6
Characteristic curves of
photocurrent vs. applied voltage for
incident light, we obtain the curves shown in Fig. 19.6. The
light of different frequencies.
current is same but stopping potential is different for each
frequency of incident light, which indicates the proportionality
of maximum kinetic energy with frequency of light f.
186
---

The important results of the experiments are
1.
The electrons are emitted with different energies. The
maximum energy of photoelectrons depends on the
particular metal surface and the frequency of incident
For Your Information
light.
2.
There is a minimum frequency below which no electrons
are emitted, however intense the light may be. This
threshold frequency f. varies from metal to metal.
K.E.
3.
Electrons are emitted instantaneously, the intensity of
light determines only their number.
0
f
These results could not be explained on the basis of
electromagnetic wave theory of light. According to this
theory, increasing the intensity of incident light should
A graph of the maximum kinetic
energy of photoelectrons vs. light
increase the K.E. of emitted electrons which contradicts the
frequency. Below a certain
experimental result. The classical theory cannot also explain
frequency, for no photoemission
occurs.
the threshold frequency of light.
Explanation on the Basis of Quantum Theory
Einstein extended the idea of quantization of energy
proposed by Max Planck that light is emitted or absorbed in
quanta, known as photons. The energy of each photon of
frequency f as given by quantum theory is
E=hf
A photon could be absorbed by a single electron in the metal
surface. The electron needs a certain minimum energy called
the work function 'O' to escape from the metal surface. If the
energy of incident photon is sufficient, the electron is ejected
instantaneously from the metal surface. A part of the photon
energy (work function) is used by the electron to break away
from the metal and the rest appears as the kinetic energy of
the electron. That is,
Incident photon energy - Work function = Max. K.E. of photoelectron
or
hf- max
(19.12)
This is known as Einstein's photoelectric equation.
When K.Emax of the photoelectron is zero, the frequency f is
equal to threshold frequency for hence the Eq. 19.12 becomes
hf.-=0
or
=hf.
(19.13)
Hence, we can also write Einstein's photoelectric equation as
187
---

K.Emax =hf-hfg
(19.14)
It is to be noted that all the emitted electrons do not possess
quartz or glass tube
the maximum kinetic energy, some electrons come straight
out of the metal surface and some lose energy in atomic
cathode
collisions before coming out. The equation 19.14 holds good
only for those electrons which come out with full surplus
energy.
Albert Einstein was awarded Nobel Prize in physics in 1921
anode
for his explanation of photoelectric effect.
Note that the phenomenon of photoelectric effect cannot be
explained if we assume that light consists of waves and
cathode
energy is uniformly distributed over its wavefront. It can only
be explained by assuming light consists of corpuscles of
energy known as photon. Thus it shows the corpuscular
nature of light.
anode
Photocell
A photocell is based on photoelectric effect. A simple
Fig 19.7 Simple photo-emissive cell
photocell is shown in Fig. 19.7. It consists of an evacuated
glass bulb with a thin anode rod and a cathode of an
appropriate metal surface. The material of the cathode is
selected to suit to the frequency range of incident radiation
over which the cell is operated. For example sodium or
potassium cathode emits electrons for visible light, cesium
coated oxidized silver emits electrons for infrared light and
some other metals respond to ultraviolet radiation. When
photo-emissive surface is exposed to appropriate light
(a)
(Fig. 19.8 a), electrons are emitted and a current flows in the
external circuit which increases with the increase in light
Flg 19.B Sound track on a film which
intensity. The current stops when the light beam is
varies the intensity of light reaching
interrupted. The cell has wide range of applications. Some of
the photo cell.
these are to operate:
1.
Security systems
light
2.
Counting systems
3.
Automatic door systems
sound track
4.
Automatic street lighting
load resistor
5.
Exposure meter for photography
R
(b)
6.
Sound track of movies (Fig. 19.8 b)
to amplifier
Fig. 19.8 Photocell detection circuit
Example 19.6: A sodium surface is illuminated with light of
for sound track of movies.
wavelength 300 nm. The work function of sodium metal
188
---

is 2.46 eV.
(a)
Find the maximum K.E. of the ejected electron.
(b)
Determine the cut off wavelength for sodium.
Solution:
a = 300 nm, ©=2.46eV
(a)
Energy of incident photon
E=hf=nd
or 6.63x10-34 Jsx3x108 m ms-1 6.63x10-19
J
E=4.14eV
Now K.Emax =hf-0=4.14 eV - 2.46 eV = 1,68 eV
(b) 0=2.46eV=3.94x10-19j
Using
or hc J 108 ms-¹ = 5.05x10-7 m
No = 505 mm
The cut off wavelength is in the green region of the visible
spectrum
Compton Effect
Arthur Holly Compton at Washington University in 1923
studied the scattering of X-rays by loosely bound electrons
from a graphite target (Fig. 19.9 a). He measured the
wavelength of X-rays scattered at an angel 0 with the original
Detector
direction. He found that wavelength 2 of the scattered X-rays
Scattered
photon
is larger than the wavelength 2, of the incident X-rays. This is
known as Compton effect. The increase in wavelength of
scattered X-rays could not be explained on the basis of
C
classical wave theory. Compton suggested that X-rays
consist of photons and in the process of scattering the
X-rays
photons suffer collision with electrons like billiard balls
(Fig.19.9 b & c). In this collision, a part of incident photon
energy and momentum is transferred to an electron. Applying
(a)
energy and momentum conservation laws to the process, he
Fig. 19.9 (a) Compton's scattering
derived an expression for the change in wavelength Ah
experiment
known as Compton shift for scattering angle 0 as
189
---

(19.15)
P. = h/2,
where m® is the rest mass of the electron. The factor
has
Photon
moc
Free electron
dimensions of length and is called Compton wavelength and
E
has the numerical value
h Js
moc = m
(b)
If the scattered X-ray photons are observed at 0 = 90°, the
Pg=h/h,
Compton shift AN equals the Compton wavelength. The
Eq.19.15 was found to be in complete agreement with
Compton's experimental result, which again is a striking
confirmation of particle like interaction of electromagnetic
E,
waves with matter.
P.
Arthur Holly Compton was awarded Nobel Prize in physics in
1927 for his discovery of the effect named after him.
(c)
Example 19.7: A 50 keV photon is Compton scattered by a
quasi-free electron. If the scattered photon comes off at 45°,
(b) Aphoton collides with an
electron and (c) Both are scattered
what is its wavelength?
Solution:
E = 50 keV=50x103x1.6x10-19
Using
or
ms-1
0.0248nm
Now
=0.2429x10" m x 0.293
X'-i=0.0007 nm
+0.0007 nm
N = 0.0248 nm + 0.0007 nm = 0.0255 nm
190
---

Pair Production
In the previous sections you have studied that a low energy
photon interacting with a metal is usually completely
absorbed with the emission of electron (Photoelectric effect)
and a high energy photon such as that of X-rays is scattered
by an atomic electron transferring a part of its energy to the
electron (Compton effect). A third kind of interaction of very
high energy photon such as that of y-rays with matter is pair
production in which photon energy is changed into an
electron-positron pair. A positron is a particle having mass and
charge equal to that of electron but the charge being of
opposite nature i.e. positive. The creation of two particles with
photon
electron
equal and opposite charges is essential for charge
conservation in the universe. The positron is also known as
antiparticle of electron or anti-electron. The interaction
usually takes place in the electric field in the vicinity of a heavy
positron
nucleus
nucleus as shown in the Fig. 19.10 so that there is a particle to
take up recoil energy and momentum is conserved.
Pair Production
In the process, radiant energy is converted into matter in
accordance with Einstein's equation E = mc2, and hence, is
Fig. 19.10
also known as materialization of energy. For an electron or
positron, the rest mass energy = m.c2 = 0.51 MeV. Thus to
create the two particles 2 X 0.51 MeV or 1.02 MeV energy is
required. For photons of energy greater than 1.02 MeV, the
probability of pair production occurrence increases as the
energy increases and the surplus energy is carried off by the
two particles in the form of kinetic energy. The process can be
represented by the equation
Energy required
Kinetic energy
Energy of photon =
+
for pair production
of the particles
hf = 2m,c2 + K.E. (e-) + K.E. (e+)
(19.16)
19.6 ANNIHILATION OF MATTER
It is converse of pair production when a positron comes close
to an electron they annihilate or destroy each other. The
matter of two particles changes into electromagnetic energy
producing two photons in the y-rays range.
e
+ e
Y
+
Y
The two photons are produced travelling in opposite
directions (Fig. 19.11) so that momentum is conserved. Each
191
---

photon has energy 0.51 MeV equivalent to rest mass energy
of a particle.
The existence of positron was predicted by Dirac in 1928 and
it was discovered in the cosmic radiation in 1932 by Carl
Anderson. It gradually became clear that every particle has a
corresponding antiparticle with the same mass and charge (if
it is a charged particle) but of opposite sign. Particles and
antiparticles also differ in the signs of other quantum
numbers that we have not yet discussed. A particle and its
antiparticle cannot exist together at one place. Whenever
they meet, they annihilate each other. That is, the particles
disappear, their combined rest energies appear in other
7 photon
forms. Proton and antiproton annihilation has also been
observed at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.
electron
19.7 WAVE NATURE OF PARTICLES
It has been observed that light displays a dual nature, it acts
as a wave and it acts as a particle. Assuming symmetry in
nature, the French physicist, Louis de Broglie proposed in
positron
1924 that particles should also possess wavelike properties.
As momentum p of photon is given by equation 19.11.
Fig. 19.11
p=h
de Broglie suggested that momentum of a material particle of
mass m moving with velocity V should be given by the same
expression. Thus
p=n=mv
or
p h mv
(19.17)
where r is the wavelength associated with particle waves.
Do You Know?
Hence an electron can be considered to be a particle and it
can also be considered to be a wave. The equation 19.17 is
called de Broglie relation.
Light is, in short, the most refined
form of matter (Louis de Broglie
An object of large mass and ordinary speed has such a small
1892-1987).
wavelength that its wave effects such as interference and
diffraction are negligible. For example, a rifle bullet of mass
20 g and flying with speed 330 ms" will have a wavelength X
given by
kgx330ms Js = 1x10-34 m
192
---

This wavelength is so small that it is not measurable or
detectable by any of its effects.
On the other hand for an electron moving with a speed of
x 10 m s ,
= 7 x 10 - 10
This wavelength is in the X-rays range. Thus, diffraction
effects for electrons are measurable whereas diffraction or
interference effects for bullets are not.
Electron,
Davisson and Germer Experiment
gun
A convincing evidence of the wave nature of electrons was
provided by Clinton J. Davisson and Laster H. Germer. They
Detector
showed that electrons are diffracted from metal crystals in
exactly the same manner as X-rays or any other wave. The
apparatus used by them is shown in Fig. 19.12, in which
electrons from heated filament are accelerated by an
Nickel
adjustable applied voltage V. The electron beam of energy
crystal
Ve is made incident on a nickel crystal. The beam diffracted
from crystal surface enters a detector and is recorded as a
current I. The gain in K.E. of the electron as it is accelerated
by a potential Vin the electron gun is
Fig.19.12 Experimental arrangement
of Davisson and Germer for electron
diffraction.
given by
Ve
or
mv²=2Ve : =2mVe
or
mv
=
2m me
From de Broglie equation
a = mv h
h
Thus
a = 2 2Vme
(19.18)
In one of the experiments, the accelerating voltage V was 54
volts, hence
a = h = 6.63x10-34
a = 1.66x10-10
This beam of electrons diffracted from crystal surface was
obtained for a glancing angle of 65°, According to Bragg's
193
---

equation
d sin 0 = m).
For 1st order diffraction m=1
For nickel
d=0.91x1010 m
Thus
2x0.91x10-10 m x sin 65 ° =
which gives
=1.65x1010m
Thus, experimentally observed wavelength is in excellent
agreement with theoretically predicted wavelength.
For Your Information
Diffraction patterns have also been observed with protons,
neutrons, hydrogen atoms and helium atoms thereby giving
Screen
substantial evidence for the wave nature of particles.
For his work on the dual nature of particles, Prince Louis
Double slit
Victor de Broglie received the 1929 Nobel Prize in physics.
00
Clinton Joseph Davisson and George Paget Thomson
shared the Nobel Prize in 1937 for their experimental
Image of the
confirmation of the wave nature of particles.
Beam of
double slit
electrons
Wave Particle Duality
(a)
Interference and diffraction of light confirm its wave nature,
while photoelectric effect proves the particle nature of light.
Screen
Similarly, the experiments of Davisson and Germer and
G.P. Thomson reveal wave like nature of electrons and in the
experiment of J.J. Thomson to find elm we had to assume
particle like nature of the electron. In the same way we are
forced to assume both wavelike and particle like properties
for all matter: electrons, protons, neutrons, molecules etc.
Beam of
and also light, X-rays, y-rays etc. have to be included in this.
electrons
In other words, matter and radiation have a dual 'wave-
particle' nature and this new concept is known as wave
(b)
particle duality. Niels Bohr pointed out in stating his principle
of complementarity that both wave and particle aspects are
(a) If electrons behaved as discrete
particles with no wave properties
required for the complete description of both radiation and
they would pass through one or the
matter. Both aspects are always present and either may be
other of the two slits and strike the
revealed by an experiment. However, both aspects cannot
screen causing it to glow and
produce exact images of the silts (b)
be revealed simultaneously in a single experiment, which
in reality the screen reveals a pattern
aspect is revealed is determined by the nature of the
of bright and dark fringes similar to
experiment being done. If you put a diffraction grating in the
light is used and interference occurs
between the light waves coming from
path of a light beam, you reveal it as a wave. If you allow the
each slit
light beam to hit a metal surface, you need to regard the
beam as a stream of particles to explain your observations.
There is no simple experiment that you can carry out with the
194
---

beam that will require you to interpret it as a wave and as a
particle at the same time. Light behaves as a stream of
photons when it interacts with matter and behaves as a wave
in traveling from a source to the place where it is detected. In
effect, all micro-particles (electrons, protons, photons, atoms
etc.) propagate as if they were waves and exchange energies
as if they were particles - that is the wave particle duality.
Example 19.8: A particle of mass 5.0 mg moves with speed
of 8.0ms+1. Calculate its de Broglie wavelength.
Solution:
m=5.0mg=5.0x10* kg =
v=80ms
h=6.63x10**,
Js
Using = 1.66x10-29 m
Example 19.9: An electron is accelerated through a
Potential Difference of 50 V. Calculate its de Broglie
wavelength.
Solution:
m=9.1x10-31kg,
Vo=50V,
2=?
e=1.6x10-19 C
1mv2 = vo
p=mv=,2mVe
then
p
2
6.63x10-34
Js
2x9.1x10-31 kg x 50 JC - x 1.6x10-19 C
=1.74x10-10 m
Uses of Wave Nature of Particles
The fact that energetic particles have extremely short
de Broglie wavelengths has been put to practical use in many
ultra-modern devices of immense importance such as
electron microscope.
195
---

Electron Microscope
Electron microscope makes practical use of the wave nature
electron source
of electrons which is thousands of time shorter than visible
light which enables the electron microscope to distinguish
details not visible with optical microscope. In an electron
microscope, electric and magnetic fields rather than optical
magnetic
lenses are used to focus electrons by means of
condenser
electromagnetic forces that are exerted on moving charges.
The resulting deflections of the electrons beams are similar
specimen
to the refraction effects produced by glass lenses used to
magnetic
focus light in optical microscope. The electrons are
objective
accelerated to high energies by applying voltage from 30 kV
to several megavolts. Such high voltages give extremely
short wavelength and also give the electron sufficient energy
to penetrate specimen of reasonable thickness. A resolution
first image
of 0.5 to 1 nm is possible with a 50 kV microscope as
compared to best optical resolution of 0.2 um. A schematic
intermediate
diagram of the electron microscope is shown in the Figure
image projector
19.13. The magnetic conducting lens concentrates the beam
from an electron gun on to the specimen. Electrons are
scattered out of the beam from the thicker parts of the
specimen. The transmitted beam therefore has spatial
differences in density that correspond to the features of the
second stage
specimen. The objective and intermediate lenses produce a
magnified image
real intermediate image and projection lens forms the final
image which can be viewed on a fluorescent screen or
photographed on special film known as electron micrograph.
A three dimensional image of remarkable quality can be
Electron microscope ( Block Diagram)
achieved by modern versions called scanning electron
Fig. 19.13
microscopes.
19.8 UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
Position and momentum of a particle cannot both be
measured simultaneously with perfect accuracy. There is
always a fundamental uncertainty associated with any
Do You Know?
measurement. This uncertainty is not associated with the
measuring instrument. It is a consequence of the wave
In the subatomic world few things can
particle duality of matter and radiation. This was first
be predicted with 100% precision.
proposed by Werner Heisenberg in 1927 and hence is known
as Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. This fundamental
uncertainty is completely negligible for measurements of
position and momentum of macroscopic objects but is a
predominant fact of life in the atomic domain. For example, a
stream of light photons scattering from a flying tennis ball
196
---

hardly affects its path, but one photon striking an electron
drastically alters the electron's motion. Since light has also
wave properties, we would expect to be able to determine the
position of the electron only to within one wavelength of the
light being used. Hence, in order to observe the position of an
electron with less uncertainty and also for minimizing
diffraction effect, we must use light of short wavelength. But it
will alter the motion drastically making momentum
measurement less precise. If light of wavelength a is used to
locate a micro particle moving along x-axis, the uncertainty in
its position measurement is
Ax=2
At most, the photon of light can transfer all its momentum
(h)
to the micro particle whose own momentum will then be
uncertain by an amount
Ap= =
Multiplying these two uncertainties gives
AXAP=1/F)=h
e
(19.19)
The equation 19.19 is the mathematical form of uncertainty
principle. It states that the product of the uncertainty Ax in the
For Your information
position of a particle at some instant and the uncertainty Ap in
the x-component of its momentum at the same instant
You can never accurately describe all
aspects of a subatomic particle at
approximately equals Planck's constanth.
once.
There is another form of uncertainty principle which relates
the energy of a particle and the time at which it had the
energy. If the AE is the uncertainty in our knowledge of the
energy of our particle and if the time interval during which
the particle had the energy E+ 12 is then
AE.At=h
(19.20)
Thus more accurately we determined the energy of a particle,
the more uncertain we will be of the time during which it has
that energy.
According to Heisenberg's more careful calculations, he
found that at the very best
197
---

(19.21)
.
(19.22)
where
n=h=1.05x10~* Js
Wener Karl Heisenberg received Nobel Prize for physics in
1932 for the development of quantum mechanics.
Example 19.10: The life time of an electron in an excited
state is about 10-8 S. What is its uncertainty in energy during
this time?
Solution:
Using uncertainty principle
.t=h
Js
E=1.05102,
Example 19.11: An electron is to be confined to a box of the
size of the nucleus (1.0 x10-14 m). What would the speed of
the electron be if it were so confined?
Solution:
Maximum uncertainty in the location of electron equals the
size of the box Itself that Is AX = 1.0 x 10-14 m. The minimum
uncertainty in the velocity of electron is found from
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
Ap 2 AX
or
MAV mAV h
AV 2 mAx h = 1.05 x 10 34 Js = 1.1510s
For confinement In the box, the speed should be greater than
the speed of light. Because this is not possible, we must
conclude that an electron can never be found inside the
nucleus.
198
---

SUMMARY
An inertial frame of reference is defined as a coordinate system in which the law of
inertia is valid. A frame of reference that is not accelerating is an inertial frame of
reference.
The special theory of relatively treats problems involving inertial or non-accelerating
frames of reference. It is based upon two postulates.
(i)
The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames.
(ii)
The speed of light in free space has the same value for all observers,
regardless of their state of motion.
E = mc IS an important result of special theory of relativity
A black body is a solid block having a hollow cavity within it. It has small hole and the
radiation can enter or escape only through this hole.
Stephen Boltzmann law states that total energy radiated over all wave length at a
particular temperature is directly proportional to the fourth power of that Kelvin
temperature.
The emission of electrons from a metal surface when exposed to ultraviolet light is
called photoelectric effect. The emitted electrons are known as photoelectrons.
When X-rays are scattered by loosely bound electrons from a graphite target, it is
known as Compton effect.
The change of very high energy photon into an electron, positron pair is called pair
production.
When a positron comes close to an electron, they annihilate and produce two
photons in the Y - rays range. It is called annihilation of matter.
Position and momentum of a particle cannot both be measured simultaneously with
perfect accuracy. There is always a fundamental uncertainty associated with any
measurement. It is a consequence of the wave particle duality of matter and
radiation. It is known as Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
QUESTIONS
19.1
What are the measurements on which two observers in relative motion will always
agree upon?
19.2
Does the dilation means that time really passes more slowly in moving system or
that it only seems to pass more slowly?
19.3
If you are moving in a spaceship at a very high speed relative to the Earth, would you
notice a difference (a) in your pulse rate (b) in the pulse rate of people on Earth?
199
---

19.4
If the speed of light were infinite, what would the equations of special theory of
relativity reduce to?
19.5 Since mass is a form of energy, can we conclude that a compressed spring has more
mass than the same spring when it is not compressed?
19.6
As a solid is heated and begins to glow, why does it first appear red?
19.7
What happens to total radiation from a blackbody if its absolute temperature is
doubled?
19.8
A beam of red light and a beam of blue light have exactly the same energy. Which
beam contains the greater number of photons?
19.9 Which photon, red, green, or blue carries the most (a) energy and
(b)
momentum?
19.10 Which has the lower energy quanta? Radiowaves or X-rays
19.11
Does the brightness of a beam of light primarily depends on the frequency of
photons or on the number of photons?
19.12 When ultraviolet light falls on certain dyes, visible light is emitted. Why does this not
happen when infrared light falls on these dyes?
19.13 Will bright light eject more electrons from a metal surface than dimmer light of the
same colour?
19.14 Will higher frequency light eject greater number of electrons than low frequency light?
19.15 When light shines on a surface, is momentum transferred to the metal surface?
19.16 Why can red light be used in a photographic dark room when developing films, but a
blue or white light cannot?
19.17
Photon A has twice the energy of photon B. What is the ratio of the momentum of A to
that of B?
19.18 Why don't we observe a Compton effect with visible light?
19.19 Can pair production take place in vacuum? Explain
19.20 Is it possible to create a single electron from energy? Explain.
19.21 If electrons behaved only like particles, what pattern would you expect on the screen
after the electrons passes through the double slit?
19.22 If an electron and a proton have the same de Broglie wavelength, which particle has
greater speed?
19.23 We do not notice the de Broglie wavelength for a pitched cricket ball. Explain why?
19.24 If the following particles have the same energy, which has the shortest wavelength?
Electron, alpha particle, neutron, proton.
19.25 When does light behave as a wave? When does it behave as a particle?
19.26 What advantages an electron microscope has over an optical microscope?
19.27 If measurements show a precise position for an electron, can those
measurements show precise momentum also? Explain.
200
---

PROBLEMS
19.1 A particle called the pion lives on the average only about 2.6 X 10 S when at rest
in the laboratory. It then changes to another form. How long would such a particle
live when shooting through the space at 0.95 c?
[Ans. 8.3 X 10-superscript(6) s]
19.2
What is the mass of a 70 kg man in a space rocket traveling at 0.8 C from us as
measured from Earth?
[Ans. 116.7 kg]
19.3
Find the energy of photon in
(b)
Radiowave of wavelength 100 m
(c)
Green light of wavelength 550 nm
(d) X-ray with wavelength 0.2 nm
[Ans. (a) 1.24 x 10 6 eV (b) 2.25 eV (c) 6200 eV
19.4
Yellow light of 577 nm wavelength is incident on a cesium surface. The stopping
voltage is found to be 0.25 V. Find
(a)
the Maximum K.E. of the photoelectrons
(b)
the work function of cesium
[Ans. (a) 4 x 10 20 J (b) 1.91 eV
19.5 X-rays of wavelength 22 pm are scattered from a carbon target. The scattered
radiation being viewed at 85° to the incident beam. What is Compton shift?
[Ans. 2.2x10-12 m]
19.6
A 90 keV X-ray photon is fired at a carbon target and Compton scattering occurs.
Find the wavelength of the incident photon and the wavelength of the scattered
photon for scattering angle of (a) 30° (b) 60°
[Ans. 13.8 pm (a) 14.1 pm (b) 15 pm]
19.7 What is the maximum wavelength of the two photons produced when a positron
annihilates an electron? The rest mass energy of each is 0.51 MeV.
[Ans. 2.44x1012
19.8
Calculate the wavelength of
(a)
a 140 g ball moving at 40ms
(b)
a proton moving at the same speed
(c)
an electron moving at the same speed
[Ans. (a) 1.18 x 10 ¹ m (b) 9.92 nm (c) 1.82 x 10 5 m]
19.9
What is the de Broglie wavelength of an electron whose kinetic energy is 120 eV?
[Ans. 1.12x10 m]
19,10 An electron is placed in a box about the size of an atom that is about 1.0 x 10-10 m.
What is the velocity of the electron?
[Ans. 7.29x10°n ms*)
201
---